---
title: "IVOA NEWSLETTER - December 2008"
date: 2008-12-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events

### What is the IVOA?

The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to "facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems, and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory."
The IVOA now comprises 16 VO projects from Armenia, Australia, Canada, China,
Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, Russia, Spain, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. Membership is open to other national and
international projects according to the IVOA Guidelines for Participation. You
can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://www.ivoa.net/pub/info/>.

# VO applications highlights

### AstroGrid VO Desktop Suite

{{< side-image image="astrogrid_sh_thumb.jpg" >}}

This newly released suite includes several interlinked tools including an
iTunes-inspired browser, VOExplorer, which allows you to search, filter, save
and bookmark your favourite VO resources. You can search for data by position,
or run more complex queries where available. AstroRuntime software runs in the
background and allows seamless visualization of selected catalogues, images,
spectra, and time domain datasets in VO enabled tools. You can also save and
share files in VOSpace and invoke remote applications. For those wanting
command-line access, all the functionality of the VODesktop is available using
python scripting, with IDL to follow.

**More information:** <http://www.astrogrid.org>

{{</ side-image >}}

### VirGO v1.3.1

{{< side-image image="VirGOLogo.png" >}}

VirGO is the next generation visual browser for the ESO Science Archive
Facility. VirGO provides an easy access to millions of raw frames in a visual
and intuitive way. Its main feature is the performance of real-time access and
graphical display of a large number of observations by showing instrumental
footprints and image previews, and the selection and filtering for subsequent
retrieval. It uses the DSS as background images and allows the user to view the
sky in a "real-life mode" as seen from the main ESO sites. Data interfaces are
based on VO standards, enabling access to images and spectra hosted by other
data centers. VirGO can also exchange data with other VO applications through
the PLASTIC messaging system. A large fraction of ESO's non proprietary science
products are already accessible through VirGO and more are to come, including
the data products from the ESO Public Surveys.

**More information:** <http://archive.eso.org/cms/virgo/>

{{</ side-image >}}
 
### VO-CLI - Command Line Tools for the VOvocli

{{< side-image image="m33_vocli.png" >}}

VO-CLI is a package of command-line tools that provides familiar unix-like
access to VO services while hiding much of the complexity of the underlying VO
framework from novice users. These tools can be used from the desktop, in
various scripting environments, or in back-end CGI scripting to support web
applications, and have the ability to output results in a variety of formats.
Another key feature of the package is the ability to optionally use "common"
names for both objects and VO resources; these names are resolved internally to
sky positions or service URLs. "Power users" will quickly become proficient
using the command-line interface; a web interface to the tasks is also available
for novice users or those wishing to experiment.

**More information:** <http://iraf-nvo.noao.edu/vo-cli/>

{{</ side-image >}}


### Large Images in Aladinaladin

{{< side-image image="aladin_small.jpg" >}}

The latest version of the Aladin software provided by CDS in Strasbourg now
supports use of large images, unlimited by the local computer memory. Other
changes include image transparency, automatic scale and orientation adjustment,
Russian & traditional Chinese translation, and more. Aladin is an interactive
software sky atlas allowing the user to visualize digitized astronomical images,
superimpose entries from astronomical catalogues or databases, and interactively
access related data and information from the Simbad database, the VizieR service
and other archives for all known sources in the field

**More information:** <http://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/aladin.gml>

{{</ side-image >}}

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

- [VOSA: Virtual Observatory SED Analyzer. An application to the Collinder 69 open cluster](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2008arXiv0808.0270B) Bayo A. et al., 2008, A&A, in press
- [Young stars and brown dwarfs surrounding Alnilam (eps Ori) and Mintaka (del Ori)](http://esoads.eso.org/abs/2008A%26A...485..931C) Caballero J.A. & Solano E., 2008, A&A, 485, 931
- [SDSSJ124155.33+114003.7 -- a Missing Link Between Compact Elliptical and Ultracompact Dwarf Galaxies](http://esoads.eso.org/abs/2008MNRAS.385L..83C) Chilingarian I.V. & Mamon G.A., 2008, MNRAS, 385, 83
- [Invisible sunspots and rate of solar magnetic flux emergence](http://esoads.eso.org/abs/2008A%26A...479L...1D) Dalla S., Fletcher L., Walton, N. A., 2008, A&A, 479, L1
- [Fossil Groups in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey](http://esoads.eso.org/abs/2007AJ....134.1551S) Santos W.A., Mendes de Oliveira C., Sodre L. Jr, 2007, AJ, 134, 1551
- [Albus 1: A Very Bright White Dwarf Candidate](http://esoads.eso.org/abs/2007ApJ...665L.151C) Caballero J.A., Solano E., 2007, ApJ, 665, L151
- [Using VO tools to investigate distant radio starbursts hosting obscured AGN in the HDF(N) region](http://esoads.eso.org/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2007arXiv0706.3777R) Richards A.M.S., Muxlow T.W.B., Beswick,R., et al., 2007, A&A, 472, 805
- [Flare productivity of newly-emerged paired and isolated solar active regions](http://esoads.eso.org/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2007A&A...468.1103D) Dalla S., Fletcher L., Walton N.A., 2007, A&A, 468, 1103
- [eSDO algorithms, data centre and visualization tools](http://esoads.eso.org/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2007AN....328..356A) Auden E., Toutain T., Zharkov S., 2007, AN, 328, 356

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

- [All ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract
- [All refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

# VO calendar

- **1-3 December 2008: [Multi-wavelength Astronomy & VO Workshop: a Euro-VO AIDA Community Workshop](http://esavo.esa.int/MultiwavelengthVOWorkshopDec2008/)**

  (ESAC, Villafranca del Castillo, Spain)

  The VO is becoming indispensable for accessing and handling the exponentially
  increasing data volume. The goal of this workshop is to pinpoint the
  challenges multi-wavelength astronomy will be facing in the coming years and
  to identify how the unique capabilities intrinsic to the VO concept can meet
  them.

* **4-9 January, 2009: 213th [American Astronomical Society Meeting](http://aas.org/meetings/aas213)**

  (Long Beach, California, USA)

  The American Astronomical Society (AAS) is the major organization of
  professional astronomers in North America.

* **2-5 March 2009: [Second International Workshop on Practical Semantic Astronomy](http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/workshops/semast09/)**

  (Glasgow, UK)

  This workshop brings together experts from a broad range of disciplines using
  semantic technologies, alongside practitioners experimenting with these
  technologies to address current problems in astroinformatics. Currently we are
  seeking papers for the workshop.

* **24-29 May, 2009 [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://www.ivoa.net/cgi-bin/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2009)**

  (Strasbourg, France)

  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in
  generating new standards powering the development of the world wide Virtual
  Observatory initiatives.

* **14 June - 5 July 2009: [Wide-Fast-Deep Surveys: New Astrophysics Frontier](http://aspenphys.org/documents/program/summer09.html)**

  (Aspen, Colorado, USA)

  The goal of this workshop is to bring theorists, observers, and computational
  scientists together to discuss the discovery space of wide-fast-deep surveys,
  and to develop algorithms and observing strategies that maximize the
  scientific return of such a program.

* **4-8 October 2009: [ADASS XIX](http://www.adass.org/)**

  (Sapporo, Japan)

  The Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) conference is held
  each year at a different hosting astronomical institution. The conference
  provides a forum for scientists and programmers concerned with algorithms,
  software and software systems employed in the acquisition, reduction,
  analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data.

----

**IVOA Newsletter Editors:**

- Mark G. Allen
- Sarah Emery Bunn
- Evanthia Hatziminaoglou
- Bob Mann
- Thomas. A. McGlynn
- Christopher J. Miller
- Anita M.S. Richards
- Jonathan Tedds

[write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)

[Subscribe to email notifications of the IVOA Newsletter](http://www.eso.org/lists/listinfo/ivoa-news)