---
title: "IVOA NEWSLETTER - October 2011"
date: 2011-10-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
highlights:
- IVOA Recommendations Available from arXiv & ADS
- US VAO's Iris SED Analysis Tool
- VOIPortal
- VO-India Android application
- VOPlot v1.7
- FITSManager
- Featured Paper
- Refereed Publications
- VO calendar
---

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 19 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan,
Russia, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States and inter-governmental
organizations (ESA and ESO). Membership is open to other national and
international programs according to the IVOA Guidelines for Participation. You
can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://www.ivoa.net/pub/info/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="adsarxivivoa.png" >}}

### IVOA Recommendations Available from arXiv & ADS

All the core IVOA documents are now available from arXiv and are listed in ADS.
This currently includes all IVOA Recommendations as well as the IVOA
Architecture paper. This gives the documents greater exposure and provides a
simple, standard way for people to cite these important publications in the
mainstream literature. All IVOA recommendations currently in ADS can be found
[here](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/basic_connect?qsearch=%22IVOA+recommendation%22).
We plan to update the list in the near future and incorporate all these papers
in the main astronomy database.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications highlights

{{< side-image image="h-596-iris_final.png" >}}

### US VAO's Iris SED Analysis Tool

Iris is a new desktop tool for construction and analysis of spectral energy
distributions (SEDs). Iris enables the construction of an SED from multiple
spectral and photometric data segments across a wide spectral range. It also
allows the user to fit the resulting SED with empirical and/or theoretical
models. SED data may be uploaded into the application from VOTable and FITS
format files, or imported directly from the NASA Extragalactic Database (NED).
Iris also includes the capability to convert from other formats to a FITS or
VOTable. Iris also writes the resulting SEDs, and their fits, to external data
files.

**More Information:** <http://www.usvao.org/tools/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="voiportal.png" thumbnail="voiportal_thumb.png" >}}

### VOIPortal

VOIPortal is an entry point to all VO-India (VOI) web services including the VOI
[Mosaic](http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/%7Evoi/VOIMosaicService.html) and
[PyMorph](http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/%7Evoi/VOIPymorphService.html) web
applications. Users can also browse & download data produced by Mosaic and
PyMorph in their VOI userspace. The beta release of VOIPortal includes
enhancements such as the ability to add iGoogle gadgets, sharing gadgets,
support for multiple tabs, and 'drag and drop' layout changes. VOI gadgets are
also published to the iGoogle gadget directory.

**More information:** <http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/VOIPortal.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="CosmoCal-screenshot.jpg" thumbnail="CosmoCal-screenshot_thumb.jpg" >}}

### VO-India Android application

VO-India releases Android Cosmological Calculator v1.0 Beta. Given user input
values for the Hubble constant, Omega(matter), Omega(vacuum) and redshift, the
Cosmological Calculator returns the co-moving radial distance and volume, the
angular-size distance at the specified redshift, the scale (kpc/arcsec), and the
luminosity distance. One may also choose between a flat and open universe. This
application is published as a free downloadable *.apk file and can be installed
on any Android 2.2 or higher mobile device. The Cosmological Calculator has been
adapted from
[Ned Wright's Cosmology Calculator](http://www.astro.ucla.edu/~wright/CosmoCalc.html).

**More information:** <http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/voandroidcc.htm>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="projection_overlay1.jpg" thumbnail="projection_overlay1_thumb.jpg" >}}

### VOPlot v1.7

In v1.6, VOPlot had undergone a major GUI upgrade making it simpler and more
flexible to use. All the plots are dynamically linked to each other as well as
to the launcher. The user can now plot columns from different VOTables against
each other. VOPlot v1.7 builds on this and has a host of new features, including
a classic "outline" format for 2D histogram, additional functionality for
projection plots (e.g. support for Galactic Lat/Long), cone search with
multi-word searching, and the use of the logical operators AND/OR. VOPlot v1.7
also provides better handling of "faulty data" while parsing an ascii file. All
this comes with a fully updated user guide as well.

**More information:** <http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/voplot.htm>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="fitsmanager.png" thumbnail="fitsmanager_thumb.png" >}}

### FITSManager

FITSManager is a desktop application for astronomers to efficiently manage and
use FITS files hosted in their personal computers, bringing the VO to its users
in a seamless and transparent way. FITSManager provides specific functions for
FITS file management like thumbnail, preview, type dependent icons, and header
keyword indexing and search. FITSManager supports SAMP, so that files in FITS or
VOTable can be sent to SAMP-ready VO tools such as
[Aladin](http://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/) or
[TOPCAT](http://www.star.bristol.ac.uk/~mbt/topcat/).
([Published paper](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.newast.2011.06.009))

**More information:** <http://fm.china-vo.org>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Paper

[Astroinformatics of galaxies and quasars: a new general method for photometric redshifts estimation](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011arXiv1107.3160L)

Laurino, O.; D'Abrusco, R.; Longo, G.; Riccio, G.

With the availability of the huge amounts of data produced by current and future
large multi-band photometric surveys, photometric redshifts have become a
crucial tool for extragalactic astronomy and cosmology. In this paper we present
a novel method, called Weak Gated Experts (WGE), which allows to derive
photometric redshifts through a combination of data mining techniques. The WGE,
like many other machine learning techniques, is based on the exploitation of a
spectroscopic knowledge base composed by sources for which a spectroscopic value
of the redshift is available. This method achieves a variance in the redshift
residuals (zphot - zspec) of 2.3x10-4 and 0.08 for the reconstruction of the
photometric redshifts for the optical galaxies from the SDSS and for the optical
quasars respectively, while the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the redshift residuals
distributions for the two experiments is respectively equal to 0.021 and 0.35.
The WGE provides also a mechanism for the estimation of the accuracy of each
photometric redshift. We also present and discuss the catalogs obtained for the
optical SDSS galaxies, for the optical candidate quasars extracted from the DR7
SDSS photometric dataset, and for optical SDSS candidate quasars observed by
GALEX in the UV range. The WGE method exploits the new technological paradigm
provided by the Virtual Observatory and the emerging field of Astroinformatics.

2011 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, in press

### Refereed Publications

*   [WISE/2MASS-SDSS brown dwarfs candidates using Virtual Observatory tools](http://arxiv.org/abs/1108.1724)  
    Aberasturi, M., Solano, E., Martin, E. L.  
    2011 Astronomy & Astrophysics, in press  
*   [A universal ultraviolet-optical colour-colour-magnitude relation of galaxies](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011arXiv1102.1159C)  
    Chilingarian, Igor; Zolotukhin, Ivan  
    2011 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, in press  
*   [TESELA: a new Virtual Observatory tool to determine blank fields for astronomical observations](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19464.x)  
    Cardiel, N.; Jiménez-Esteban, F. M.; Alacid, J. M.; Solano, E.; Aberasturi, M.  
    2011 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Online Early  
*   [Defining and cataloging exoplanets: the exoplanet.eu database](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011A%26A...532A..79S)  
    Schneider, J.; Dedieu, C.; Le Sidaner, P.; Savalle, R.; Zolotukhin, I.  
    2011 Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 532, id.A79  
*   [Estimation of the XUV radiation onto close planets and their evaporation](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011A%26A...532A...6S)  
    Sanz-Forcada, J., Micela, G., Ribas, I., Pollock, A. M. T., Eiroa, C., Velasco, A., Solano, E., Garcia-Alvarez, D.  
    2011 Astronomy & Astrophysics, 532, A6  
*   [On the use of the Virtual Observatory to select calibrators for phase-referenced astrometry of exoplanet-host stars](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011MNRAS.414..108B)  
    Beust H., Bonneau D., Mourard D., Lafrasse S., Mella G., Duvert G., Chelli A.  
    2011 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 414, Issue 1, pp. 108-115  
*   [A search for new hot subdwarf stars by means of Virtual Observatory tools](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011A&A...530A...2O)  
    Oreiro R., Rodriguez-Lopez C., Solano E., Ulla A., Ostensen R., Garcia-Torres M  
    Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 530, id.A2  
*   [New Optical Reddening Maps of the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011AJ....141..158H)  
    Haschke R., Grebel E.K., Duffau S.  
    2011 The Astronomical Journal, Volume 141, Issue 5, article id. 158  
*   [Early Science Result from the Japanese Virtual Observatory: AGN and Galaxy Clustering at z = 0.3 to 3.0Y.](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011PASJ...63S.469S)  
    Shirasaki, M. Tanaka, M. Ohishi, Y. Mizumoto, N. Yasuda, and T. Taka.  
    2011 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, Vol.63, No.SP2, pp.469--491  
*   [Enhanced Management of Personal Astronomical Data with FITSManager](http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.4847)  
    Chenzhou Cui, Dongwei Fan, Yongheng Zhao, Ajit Kembhavi, Boliang He, Zihuang Cao, Jian Li, Deoyani Nandrekar  
    2011 Accepted for publication in New Astronomy  
*   [Photometric Catalogue of Quasars and Other Point Sources in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey](http://arxiv.org/abs/1011.2173)  
    Sheelu Abraham, Ninan Sajeeth Philip, Ajit Kembhavi, Yogesh G Wadadekar, Rita Sinha  
    2011 Accepted for publication in MNRAS Main Journal

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

* [All ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract
* [All refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

---

# VO calendar

* **10-13 October, 2011** - National Workshop on Science with the Virtual Observatory
  
  (Kochi, India)
  
  With newer tools for the acquisition and processing of astronomical data from
  archives being introduced by the worldwide VO community, research in astronomy
  has become easier than ever before. Newman Collage, (Kerala, India) in
  collaboration with IUCAA (Pune, India) is conducting a national workshop on
  Science with the Virtual Observatory to present the latest developments in the
  VO to the research community.

* **17-21 October, 2011** - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://voi.iucaa.ernet.in:9090/InterOp_2011/framework/mainTemplate.jsp)
  
  (Pune, India)
  
  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in defining
  standards and sharing best practices in the development of the world wide
  Virtual Observatory initiatives.

* **8 January, 2012** - "Science Tools for Data-Intensive Astronomy" VO Workshop at AAS 219
  
  (Austin, TX)
  
  This workshop will be focused on the science tools for data discovery,
  visualization, and analysis. The workshop is structured in the form of two
  independent half-day sessions (the first half aimed at high school and
  community college educators, the second at research astronomers) and is
  designed to demonstrate the emerging set of tools and services for
  data-intensive astronomy. To register for an AAS workshop, please visit the
  [conference website](http://aas.org/meetings/aas219). In cases of documented
  need, the $35 registration fee can be reimbursed upon request. Organized and
  sponsored by the [US Virtual Astronomical Observatory](http://www.usvao.org/).

* **May 2012** - IVOA Interoperability Meeting
  
  (Washington, DC) (To Be Confirmed)
  
  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in defining
  standards and sharing best practices in the development of the world wide
  Virtual Observatory initiatives.

----

**IVOA Newsletter Editors:**

- Mark G. Allen
- Sarah Emery Bunn
- Chenzou Cui
- Evanthia Hatziminaoglou
- Thomas. A. McGlynn
- Christopher J. Miller
- Jonathan Tedds

[write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)

[Subscribe to email notifications of the IVOA Newsletter](http://www.eso.org/lists/listinfo/ivoa-news)

[newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/archives.html)