---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - May 2013"
date: 2013-05-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Mark G. Allen, Deborah Baines, Sarah Emery Bunn,
Chenzou Cui, Mark Taylor & Ivan Zolotukhin.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 19 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan,
Russia, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States and an
inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other national and
international programs according to the IVOA Guidelines for Participation. You
can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

New IVOA website! The IVOA is pleased to announce a shiny new version of our
website (<http://www.ivoa.net>). As well as an attractive new design and general
wash and brush-up, the idea was to improve the navigational structure. Different
types of visitors can follow different paths. Very general information about the
IVOA as an organization can be found in the "[About](/about/)" section.
Scientists who want to find out what the VO is about, and how to use VO tools to
do science, should use the "[Astronomers](/astronomers/)" section - in this
section there is also a page about the
[VO for students and the general public](/astronomers/vo_for_public/). Technical
types, for example, applications writers, or data center staff who want to
deploy services, can find much more nitty gritty detail in the
"[Deployers](/deployers/)" section. Last but not least, people who are actually
participating in IVOA standards development and discussion can get straight to
their favourite working group mailing lists and so on, in the
"[Members](/members/)" section. We hope you enjoy the new look!

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="VOPlot.jpg" thumbnail="VOPlot_thumb.jpg" position="right" >}}

### VOPlot

VOPlot is a tool for visualizing astronomical data, and acts on data available
in VOTABLE, ASCII and FITS formats. VOPlot has undergone considerable
improvements in the past couple of years and incremental versions have been
released regularly. The latest version features Table Access Protocol (TAP),
allowing users to query TAP compatible catalogs. The helpset is now bundled
within VOPlot. Minor ticks have been included within the plot properties. Users
can view the points with a greater precision, in order to pinpoint the point
location. A new functionality makes it possible to draw a line between any two
points in the graph. An updated user guide is released with v1.8.

**More information:** <http://voi.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/voplot.htm>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="aladin-lite.png" thumbnail="aladin-lite-thumb.png" position="left" >}}

### Aladin lite: a simple visualizer for the browser

CDS is releasing the first version of Aladin lite, a light version of Aladin
running in the browser and geared towards simple visualization of a sky region.
The first version allows one to visualize image surveys (JPEG multi-resolution
HEALPix all-sky surveys) and superimpose tabular (VOTable) and footprints
(STC-S) data. Aladin lite is powered by the HTML5 canvas technology, supported
on many platforms including desktop browsers, tablets, adn smartphones. It is
intended to replace the Aladin Java applet technology.  The full-featured Aladin
Java version will still be developed and will be oriented for standalone usage
only. Aladin lite is easily embeddable on any web page (a few dozen KB) and can
also be controlled through a Javascript API.

**More Information:** <http://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/AladinLite>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="AstroStat.jpg" thumbnail="AstroStat_thumb.jpg" position="right" >}}

### AstroStat

VO-India has recently released AstroStat, a tool that allows astronomers to use
both simple and sophisticated statistical routines on large datasets. This tool
uses a large public-domain statistical computing package called R. AstroStat has
a visual interface that is easy to comprehend and results are presented in a
well formatted manner with focus on important output parameters. It uses a third
party R library 'ggplot2' to create publication quality graphs. Help sections
explaining all the routines in sufficient detail are built into AstroStat. A TAP
client has been integrated into AstroStat to access data from TAP compatible
catalogs. AstroStat is a significant improvement over a previous similar tool by
VO-India for statistical analysis.

**More information:** <http://voi.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/AstroStat.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="iris.png" position="left" >}}

### Iris - Added capabilities for SED analysis

Iris, the VAO SED analysis tool, has been upgraded in v1.2 with visualization
capabilities that include a SED segment browser, metadata filtering by boolean
expression, and display of individual point metadata. A plug-in framework has
been added so that users can extend Iris to perform their own specific tasks.
The ASDC group has developed a plug-in that is packaged with Iris. This plug-in
serves to provide data from the ASDC SED data holdings, and also provides an
example of how users can develop their own plug-ins.

**More information:** <http://www.usvao.org/science-tools-services/iris-sed-analysis-tool/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="seleste.png" position="right" >}}

### seleste

seleste is a tool that uses VO TAP standards and ADQL protocols to access
archives that expose tabular data, and query them using a uniform interface.
Compared to applications designed to query specific datasets at a specific
location using pre-defined query forms, seleste allows ad-hoc queries against
any discoverable archive through a common interface. The architecture includes
an application with a graphical user interface, a set of command line tools, and
a library that interoperates with VO services and applications. Catalogs already
available include: the Chandra Source Catalog, SDSS, 2MASS, Hipparcos, and more.
The results of seleste queries can be saved or passed on to another VO tool,
such as Topcat.

**More information:** <http://cda.cfa.harvard.edu/seleste>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="python-powered-vo.png" position="left" >}}

### VO Invades Python!

The Virtual Astronomical Observatory (VAO) has been busy working to bring the
power of the VO into Python, and two products are on their way. The first,
VAOpy, is a python package that makes it possible to query archives for images,
catalog sources, spectra, and spectral line data, all from a python script or
interactive session. One can also discover archives and their services by
querying the VO registry. This package is built on top of the widely used
AstroPy python package. The VAO has just released a beta version and is actively
seeking feedback on its API from python developers in the community.

**More information:** <http://dev.usvao.org/vao/wiki/Products/VAOpy>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# New projects

{{< side-image image="forest_demo_v2_2_thumb.png" position="right" >}}

### FOREST: a new heliophysics data system

FOREST is a project developing a quick-look semantic search virtual observatory
for heliophysics, which allows integration, visualisation and searching of
observations from multiple instruments and multiple spacecraft. It aims to
support future missions such as Solar Orbiter. FOREST uses an RDF model to
relate observations to metadata. The data model is based on IVOA recommendations
such as the STC, Characterisation and Observation data models. A prototype of
FOREST with an advanced web UI frontend and a GAVO Data Center Helper Suite
backend is under development for ESA by Skytek Ltd. and Trinity College Dublin.

**More information:** <http://bit.ly/15HcFfV>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="asvo.jpg" position="left" >}}

### Australian All-Sky Virtual Observatory

The Australian VO informs us of The All-Sky Virtual Observatory project
consisting of [SkyMapper](http://www.asvo.org.au/about/about-skymapper/), which
will provide an integrated and comprehensive environment for the hosting,
analysis, and exploration of the
[SkyMapper Southern-Sky Survey](http://rsaa.anu.edu.au/observatories/siding-spring-observatory/telescopes/skymapper).
And [TAO](http://www.asvo.org.au/about/about-tao) (Theoretical Astrophysical
Observatory), which will provide access to several cosmological simulations,
galaxy formation models and processing on Swinburne University's super-computer.

**More Information:** <http://www.asvo.org.au/about>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Paper

[Machine-assisted discovery of relationships in astronomy](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/doi/10.1093/mnras/stt329)

_Graham, Matthew J.; Djorgovski, S. G.; Mahabal, Ashish A.; Donalek, Ciro; Drake, Andrew J._  
_Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 2013 accepted_

High-volume feature-rich data sets are becoming the bread-and-butter of 21st
century astronomy but present significant challenges to scientific discovery. In
particular, identifying scientifically significant relationships between sets of
parameters is non-trivial. Similar problems in biological and geosciences have
led to the development of systems which can explore large parameter spaces and
identify potentially interesting sets of associations. In this paper, we
describe the application of automated discovery systems of relationships to
astronomical data sets, focusing on an evolutionary programming technique and an
information-theory technique. We demonstrate their use with classical
astronomical relationships - the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram and the Fundamental
Plane of elliptical galaxies. We also show how they work with the issue of
binary classification which is relevant to the next generation of large synoptic
sky surveys, such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). We find that
comparable results to more familiar techniques, such as decision trees, are
achievable. Finally, we consider the reality of the relationships discovered and
how this can be used for feature selection and extraction.

### Refereed Publications

* [The Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope: The Final Archive](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013arXiv1303.6131D)  
  _Dixon, William V.; Blair, William P.; Kruk, Jeffrey W.; Romelfanger, Mary L  
  To appear in Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 2013_

* [Proper motions of young stars in Chamaeleon. I. A Virtual Observatory study of spectroscopically confirmed members](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013A%26A...551A..46L)  
  _Lopez Martí, B.; Jimenez Esteban, F.; Bayo, A.; Barrado, D.; Solano, E.; Rodrigo, C.  
  A&A 2013, 551, 46L_

* [Automated rapid follow-up of Swift gamma-ray burst alerts at 15 GHz with the AMI Large Array](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.428.3114S)  
  _Staley, T. D.; Titterington, D. J.; Fender, R. P.; Swinbank, J. D.; van der Horst, A. J.; Rowlinson, A.; Scaife, A. M. M.; Grainge, K. J. B.; Pooley, G. G.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 2014, 428, 3114_

* [Precovery of near-Earth asteroids by a citizen-science project of the Spanish Virtual Observatory](http://arxiv.org/abs/1302.5375)  
  _E. Solano, C. Rodrigo, R. Pulido, B. Carry  
  Accepted in Astron. Nachr_

* [The Millennium Run Observatory: first light](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.428..778O)  
  _Overzier, R.; Lemson, G.; Angulo, R. E.; Bertin, E.; Blaizot, J.; Henriques, B. M. B.; Marleau, G.-D.; White, S. D. M.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 2013, 428, 778_

* [Query driven visualization of astronomical catalogs](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ExA....35..283B)  
  _Buddelmeijer, Hugo; Valentijn, Edwin A.  
  Experimental Astronomy, Volume 35, Issue 1-2, pp. 283-300_

* [A Virtual Observatory Census to Address Dwarfs Origins. AVOCADO - I. Science goals, sample selection and analysis tools](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013arXiv1301.5320S)  
  _Sánchez-Janssen, R.; Amorín, R.; García-Vargas, M.; Gomes, J. M.; Huertas-Company, M.; Jiménez-Esteban, F.; Mollá, M.; Papaderos, P.; Pérez-Montero, E.;Rodrigo, C.; Sánchez Almeida, J.; Solano, E.  
  2013, A&A accepted_

* [Building a VO-compliant Radio Astronomical DAta Model for Single-dish radio telescopes (RADAMS)](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012ExA....34..623S)  
  _Santander-Vela, Juan de Dios; García, Emilio; Leon, Stephane; Espigares, Victor; Ruiz, José Enrique; Verdes-Montenegro, Lourdes; Solano, Enrique  
  Experimental Astronomy, Volume 34, Issue 3, pp.623-652_

* [The first planet detected in the WTS: an inflated hot Jupiter in a 3.35 d orbit around a late F star](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012MNRAS.427.1877C)  
  _Cappetta, M.; Saglia, R. P.; Birkby, J. L.; Koppenhoefer, J.; Pinfield, D. J.; Hodgkin, S. T.; Cruz, P.; et al.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 427, Issue 3, pp. 1877-1890._

* [Red supergiants around the obscured open cluster Stephenson 2](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012A&A...547A..15N)  
  _Negueruela, I.; Marco, A.; González-Fernández, C.; Jiménez-Esteban, F.; Clark, J. S.; Garcia, M.; Solano, E.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 547, id.A15 19 pp_.

* [Efficient Catalog Matching with Dropout Detection](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013PASP..125..218F)  
  _Fan, Dongwei; Budavári, Tamás; Szalay, Alexander S.; Cui, Chenzhou; Zhao, Yongheng  
  Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Volume 125, issue 924, pp.218-223_

* [Discovery of a Binary Brown Dwarf at 2 pc from the Sun](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...767L...1L)  
  _Luhman, K. L.  
  The Astrophysical Journal Letters, Volume 767, Issue 1, article id. L1, 6 id. (2013)_

* [Tera-scale astronomical data analysis and visualization](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429.2442H)  
  _Hassan, A. H.; Fluke, C. J.; Barnes, D. G.; Kilborn, V. A.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 429, Issue 3, p.2442-2455_

* [The UV and X-ray activity  of the M dwarfs within 10 pc of the Sun](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/doi/10.1093/mnras/stt225)  
  _Stelzer, B.; Marino, A.; Micela, G.; López-Santiago, J.; Liefke, C.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Advance Access. 17 pp_.

* [Innocent Bystanders: Carbon Stars from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...765...12G)  
  _Green, Paul  
  The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 765, Issue 1, article id. 12, 19 pp. (2013)._

* [Stacking Star Clusters in M51: Searching for Faint X-Ray Binaries](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...763...96V)  
  _Vulic, N.; Barmby, P.; Gallagher, S. C  
  The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 763, Issue 2, article id. 96, 12 pp. (2013)._

* [The VISTA Science Archive](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012A&A...548A.119C)  
  _Cross, N. J. G.; Collins, R. S.; Mann, R. G.; Read, M. A.; Sutorius, E. T. W.; Blake, R. P.; Holliman, M.; Hambly, N. C.; Emerson, J. P.; Lawrence, A.; Noddle, K. T.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 548, id.A119, 21 pp._

* [Easylife: The Data Reduct ion and Survey Handling System for VIPERS](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012PASP..124.1232G)
  _Garilli, B.; Paioro, L.; Scodeggio, M.; Franzetti, P.; Fumana, M.; Guzzo, L.  
  Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Volume 124, issue 921, pp.1232-1243_

* [The local luminosity function of star-forming galaxies derived from the Planck Early Release Compact Source Catalogue](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429.1309N)  
  _Negrello, M.; Clemens, M.; Gonzalez-Nuevo, J.; De Zotti, G. and 17 coauthors  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 429, Issue 2, p.1309-1323_

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

[All ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

[All refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

---

# VO calendar

* **12-17 May, 2013 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://g-vo.org/pmwiki/Interop/Interop)**
  
  (Heidelberg, Germany)
  
  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in defining
  standards and sharing best practices in the development of the world wide
  Virtual Observatory initiatives.

* **10-11 June, 2013 - [CoSADIE Astronomical Data Center Forum 2013](http://www.g-vo.org/cosadie-dcforum/)**
  
  (Heidelberg, Germany)
  
  The CoSADIE data center forum will bring together VO engineers and data
  providers to foster an interchange of ideas and requirements. Data providers
  are cordially invited to give talks on their perspective, while VO staff will
  introduce key technologies and software to make data publishing in astronomy
  easier, more effective, more sustainable and more user-friendly.

* **16-18 September, 2013 - [.Astronomy 5](http://dotastronomy.com/)**
  
  (Cambridge, MA)
  
  .Astronomy is a three-day conference, unconference and hack day: all about
  astronomy online. .Astronomy aims to bring together an international community
  of astronomy researchers, developers, educators, and communicators to
  showcase, generate ideas for, and collaborate on innovative web-based
  projects, from research tools and data analysis to outreach and education.

* **26-28 September, 2013 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpSept2013)**
  
  (Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA)
  
  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in defining
  standards and sharing best practices in the development of the world wide
  Virtual Observatory initiatives. The fall interop will be held just prior to
  the ADASS Conference (September 26-28), in the same venue. ADASS participants
  are welcome to extend their Hawaiian sojourn a few days and learn what the VO
  has to offer.

* **29 Sept - 3 October 2013 - [ADASS](http://www.adass.org/index.html)**
  
  (Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA)
  
  The **Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)** conference
  provides a forum for scientists and programmers concerned with algorithms,
  software and software systems employed in the acquisition, reduction,
  analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. 