---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - October 2013"
date: 2013-10-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Mark G. Allen, Deborah Baines, Sarah Emery Bunn,
Chenzou Cui, Mark Taylor & Ivan Zolotukhin.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan,
Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States
and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at
<http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="SAcubed_logo.png" position="left" >}}

### South Africa's Astronomical Agreement for Big Data

The South African National Research Foundation’s three astronomical facilities
have formed the [South African Astroinformatics Alliance](http://www.sa3.ac.za/)
(SA3 pronounced “SA cubed”), which serves as a virtual observatory for the
country. South Africa hosts new and upcoming observational facilities that will
generate huge amounts of data including the Southern African Large Telescope
(SALT), the Karoo Array Telescope  (MeerKAT) and a large part of the SKA. See
[the SA3 announcement](http://www.saao.ac.za/sa-astroinformatics-alliance-launched/)
of their "Astronomical agreement signed for big data!". SA3 is a member of the
IVOA since October 2012.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="logo-euhoumw-transp.png" position="right" >}}

### News from VObs.it: Remote Telescope networks for schools: toward publishing educational data in VO

The [European Hands-On-Universe Milky Way](http://euhou.obspm.fr/public/)
(EUHOUMW) is an educational project funded by the European Commission to bring
real radio observations into classrooms, where participating students use five
remotely controlled educational radio telescopes. EUHOUMW is now evaluating how
to publish the collected radio data in VO format to enable data sharing (e.g.
with the Italian optical robotic telescope network), to simplify data management
of multi-classroom projects, and to more easily incorporate professional data in
education projects. An unofficial kick-off of the collaboration between EUHOUMW
and VO was held in Paris, September 5-6, 2013. The topics being addressed
included; how to tag education data alongside professional data in the VO, and
the use of "educationalized" VO tools (following
[educational use of Aladin and Stellarium](http://wwwas.oats.inaf.it/aidawp5/eng_download.html?fsize=medium)).
Publishing, archiving, and maintaining educational data are topics for the
September 2013 IVOA Interoperability and ADASS meetings.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="alma-vo-screenshot.png" thumbnail="alma-vo-screenshot_thum.png" position="right" >}}

### ALMA VO Service

The Japanese Virtual Observatory (JVO) and ALMA-J teams have opened a VO-based
data distribution system for ALMA data cubes. The aim is to help users access
public ALMA data without huge data transfers. Two user applications, ALMAWebQL
and Vissage, were developed for this system. ALMAWebQL is a component of the JVO
Portal and enables the user to visualize and make cut-outs of ALMA data cubes in
a web browser, while Vissage is a desktop application to visualize downloaded
ALMA data cubes in more detail.

**More Information:** <http://jvo.nao.ac.jp/news/alma-vo/index.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="TheoSSA.png" thumbnail="TheoSSA_thumb.png" position="" >}}

### TheoSSA

The TheoSSA (Theoretical Stellar Spectra Access) service provides access to
synthetic spectral energy distributions (SEDs) that may be calculated by any
model-atmosphere code. The database contains pre-calculated SEDs over a wide
range of effective temperature, surface gravity, and elemental composition. The
related [TMAW tool](http://astro.uni-tuebingen.de/~TMAW) allows the calculation
of individual SEDs that presently can consider opacities of the elements H, He,
C, N, O, Ne, Na, and Mg.

**More Information:** <http://dc.g-vo.org/theossa>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="TIRO.png" thumbnail="TIRO_thumb.png" position="right" >}}

### TIRO

The TIRO (Tuebingen IRon Opacity) service constructs model atoms of Ca, Sc, Ti,
V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni based on
[Kurucz' atomic data](http://kurucz.harvard.edu/atoms.html) using a statistical
approach (introducing super-levels and super-lines) and calculates the
respective bound-bound and bound-free absorption cross-section.

**More information:** <http://astro.uni-tuebingen.de/~TIRO>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="ivoaBlurbSciencePics.png" thumbnail="ivoaBlurbSciencePics_thumb.png" position="left" >}}

### Iris version 2.0

The US VAO has released Iris 2.0, the latest version of the spectral energy
distribution (SED) analysis tool. Iris comes with powerful new science
capabilities which allow the redshifting, interpolation and smoothing of SEDs,
and measurement of integrated fluxes through simple spectral bandpasses or
through one of the thousands of photometric filters provided by the Spanish VO
Filter Profile Service. Users can also apply simple aperture corrections to
individual photometric points or to whole SED segments. In addition to improved
visualization capabilities, including the co-plotting of SEDs, Iris 2.0 has
increased interoperability with other VO tools. You can watch Iris in action in
this [video tutorial](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GMaLgJfxJHI).

**More information:** <http://www.usvao.org/science-tools-services/iris-sed-analysis-tool/>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Paper


[The virtual observatory service TheoSSA: Establishing a database of synthetic stellar flux standards. I. NLTE spectral analysis of the DA-type white dwarf G 191-B2B](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013arXiv1308.6450R)

_Rauch, T.; Bohlin, R.; Kruk, J. W.; Werner, K. Astronomy & Astrophysics, in press_

H-rich, DA-type white dwarfs are particularly suited as primary standard stars
for flux calibration. State-of-the-art NLTE models consider opacities of species
up to trans-iron elements and provide reliable synthetic stellar-atmosphere
spectra to compare with observation. We establish a database of theoretical
spectra of stellar flux standards that are easily accessible via a web
interface. In the framework of the Virtual Observatory, the German Astrophysical
Virtual Observatory developed the registered service TheoSSA. It provides easy
access to stellar spectral energy distributions (SEDs) and is intended to ingest
SEDs calculated by any model-atmosphere code. In case of the DA white dwarf G
191-B2B, we demonstrate that the model reproduces not only its overall continuum
shape but also the numerous metal lines exhibited in its ultraviolet spectrum.
TheoSSA is in operation and contains presently a variety of SEDs for DA white
dwarfs. It will be extended in the near future and can host SEDs of all primary
and secondary flux standards. The spectral analysis of G 191-B2B has shown that
our hydrostatic models reproduce the observations best at an effective
temperature of 60000 +/- 2000K and a surface gravity of log g = 7.60 +/- 0.05.
We newly identified Fe VI, Ni VI, and Zn IV lines. For the first time, we
determined the photospheric zinc abundance with a logarithmic mass fraction of
-4.89 (7.5 times solar). The abundances of He (upper limit), C, N, O, Al, Si, O,
P, S, Fe, Ni, Ge, and Sn were precisely determined. Upper abundance limits of
10% solar were derived for Ti, Cr, Mn, and Co. The TheoSSA database of
theoretical SEDs of stellar flux standards guarantees that the flux calibration
of all astronomical data and cross-calibration between different instruments can
be based on the same models and SEDs calculated with different model-atmosphere
codes and are easy to compare.

### Refereed Publications

* [Bayesian Analysis to Identify New Star Candidates in Nearby Young Stellar Kinematic Groups](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...762...88M)  
    _Malo, Lison; Doyon, René; Lafrenière, David; Artigau, Étienne; Gagné, Jonathan; Baron, Frédérique; Riedel, Adric  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 762, Issue 2, article id. 88, 50 pp. (2013)._  
    
* [The Pseudo-evolution of Halo Mass](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...766...25D)  
    _Diemer, Benedikt; More, Surhud; Kravtsov, Andrey V.  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 766, Issue 1, article id. 25, 15 pp. (2013)._  
      
* [Environmental Effects in the Interaction and Merging of Galaxies in zCOSMOS](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...762...43K)  
    _Kampczyk, P. et al._  
    _The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 762, Issue 1, article id. 43, 16 pp. (2013)._  
      
* [The Cosmic History of the Spin of Dark Matter Halos within the Large-scale Structure](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...762...72T)  
    _Trowland, Holly E.; Lewis, Geraint F.; Bland-Hawthorn, Joss  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 762, Issue 2, article id. 72, 12 pp. (2013)._  
      
* [Unveiling the Nature of Unidentified Gamma-Ray Sources. I. A New Method for the Association of Gamma-Ray Blazars](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJS..206...12D)  
    _D'Abrusco, R.; Massaro, F.; Paggi, A.; Masetti, N.; Tosti, G.; Giroletti, M.; Smith, H. A.  
    The Astrophysical Journal Supplement, Volume 206, Issue 2, article id. 12, 26 pp. (2013)._  
    
* [Fomalhaut b: Independent Analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope Public Archive Data](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...769...42G)  
    _Galicher, Raphaël; Marois, Christian; Zuckerman, B.; Macintosh, Bruce  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 769, Issue 1, article id. 42, 12 pp. (2013)._  
      
* [The binary fraction of planetary nebula central stars - I. A high-precision, I-band excess search](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.428.2118D)  
    _De Marco, Orsola; Passy, Jean-Claude; Frew, D. J.; Moe, Maxwell; Jacoby, G. H.  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 428, Issue 3, p.2118-2140  

* [Galaxy Zoo: bulgeless galaxies with growing black holes](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429.2199S)  
    _Simmons, Brooke D.; Lintott, Chris; Schawinski, Kevin; Moran, Edward C.; Han, Anna; Kaviraj, Sugata; Masters, Karen L.; Urry, C. Megan; Willett, Kyle W.; Bamford, Steven P.; Nichol, Robert C.  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 429, Issue 3, p.2199-2211_  

* [Symbiotic stars and other Hα emission-line stars towards the Galactic bulge](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.432.3186M)  
    _Miszalski, Brent; Mikołajewska, Joanna; Udalski, Andrzej  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 432, Issue 4, p.3186-3217_  
    
* [Constraints on dark matter annihilation by radio observations of M31](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013PhRvD..88b3504E)  
    _Egorov, A. E.; Pierpaoli, E.  
    Physical Review D, vol. 88, Issue 2, id. 023504_  
      
* [Estimating gas masses and dust-to-gas ratios from optical spectroscopy](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.432.2112B)  
    _Brinchmann, Jarle; Charlot, Stéphane; Kauffmann, Guinevere; Heckman, Tim; White, Simon D. M.; Tremonti, Christy  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 432, Issue 3, p.2112-2140_  
      
* [The Detection of the Large-scale Alignment of Massive Galaxies at z ~ 0.6](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...770L..12L)  
    _Li, Cheng; Jing, Y. P.; Faltenbacher, A.; Wang, Jie  
    The Astrophysical Journal Letters, Volume 770, Issue 1, article id. L12, 5 pp. (2013)._  

* [Fueling the central engine of radio galaxies. II. The footprints of AGN feedback on the ISM of 3C 236](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013A%26A...549A..58L)  
    _Labiano, A.; García-Burillo, S.; Combes, F.; Usero, A.; Soria-Ruiz, R.; Tremblay, G.; Neri, R.; Fuente, A.; Morganti, R.; Oosterloo, T.  
    Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 549, id.A58, 14 pp._  
      
* [The stellar mass-size relation for the most isolated galaxies in the local Universe](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.434..325F)  
    _Fernández Lorenzo, M.; Sulentic, J.; Verdes-Montenegro, L.; Argudo-Fernández, M.  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 434, Issue 1, p.325-335_  
      
* [The Protoplanetary Disks in the Nearby Massive Star-forming Region Cygnus OB2](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...773..135G)  
    _Guarcello, M. G.; Drake, J. J.; Wright, N. J.; Drew, J. E.; Gutermuth, R. A.; Hora, J. L.; Naylor, T.; Aldcroft, T.; Fruscione, A.; García-Alvarez, D.; Kashyap, V. L.; King, R.  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 773, Issue 2, article id. 135, 24 pp. (2013)._  
      
* [The local luminosity function of star-forming galaxies derived from the Planck Early Release Compact Source Catalogue](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429.1309N)  
    _Negrello, M.; Clemens, M.; Gonzalez-Nuevo, J.; De Zotti, G. and 17 coauthors  
    Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 429, Issue 2, p.1309-1323_   
      
* [A Cross-correlation Analysis of AGN and Galaxies using Virtual Observatory: Dependence on Virial Mass of Super-Massive Black Hole](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...775...43K)  
    _Komiya, Yutaka; Shirasaki, Yuji; Ohishi, Masatoshi; Mizumoto, Yoshihiko  
    The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 775, Issue 1, article id. 43, 12 pp. (2013)._

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

[All ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

[All refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract

---

# VO calendar

* **26-28 September, 2013 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://www.usvao.org/ivoa-sept-2013/)**

  (Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA)

  The IVOA Interop Meetings are aimed at making significant progress in defining
  standards and sharing best practices in the development of the world wide
  Virtual Observatory initiatives. The fall interop will be held just prior to
  the ADASS Conference (September 26-28), in the same venue. ADASS participants
  are welcome to attend; there is no registration fee.

* **29 Sept - 3 October 2013 - [Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)](http://www.adass.org/index.html)**
  
  (Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA)
  
  The  ADASS conference provides a forum for scientists and programmers
  concerned with algorithms, software and software systems employed in the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data.

* **13-15 November, 2013 - [Hot-wiring the Transient Universe III](http://hotwireduniverse.org/)**
  
  (Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA)
  
  Hot-wiring the Transient Universe 3 will explore opportunities and challenges
  of massively parallel time domain surveys coupled with rapid coordinated
  multi-wavelength follow-up observations. The interdisciplinary agenda includes
  future and ongoing science investigations, information infrastructure for
  publishing observations in real time, as well as novel data science to
  classify events and systems to optimize follow-up campaigns. 

* **November 18, 2013 - [Data-Intensive Scalable Computing Systems (DISCS-2013)](https://ft.ornl.gov/discs-2013/?q=home)**
  
  (Denver, Colorado, USA)
  
  The primary goal of the workshop is to bring together researchers and other
  interested people in the areas of data intensive computing and high
  performance parallel computing to exchange ideas and discuss approaches for
  addressing the challenges facing data intensive computing at the extreme
  scale.

* **9-13 December, 2013 - [Astroinformatics 2013: Knowledge from Data](http://tinyurl.com/astroinfo)**
  
  (Sydney, Australia)
  
  Astroinformatics is an emerging discipline at the intersection of
  astronomy/astrophysics and applied computer science and engineering.
  Registration and abstract submission for Astroinformatics 2013 are now open.

* **17-19 December 2013 - [VO-Day & Friends](http://vobs.astro.it/index.php/vofriends)**
  
  (Catania, Italy)
  
  This workshop, organized by VObs.it and IA2, on behalf of the EURO-VO project,
  will be a 3-day meeting for the Italian community focusing on VO dissemination
  and tutorials, the connections of VO with grid/cloud/HPC, and hands-on work on
  science gateways.

* **7 January 2014 - Building the Astronomical Information Sciences: From NASA's AISR Program to the New AAS Working Group on Astroinformatics and Astrostatistics**

  This special session at the 223rd AAS meeting will showcase science  results
  that were at least partially enabled by modern astroinformatics and
  astrostatistics tools. There will also be a poster session associated with this
  Special Session. Abstracts are being accepted via the regular AAS form and are
  due October 1, 2013.

* **17-20 June, 2014 - [LISA (Library and Information Services in Astronomy VII)](http://www.oacn.inaf.it/lisa7_2014/)**

  (Naples, Italy)
