---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - Octobre 2014"
date: 2014-10-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Mark G. Allen, Deborah Baines, Sarah Emery Bunn, Chenzou Cui, August Muench, Mark Taylor & Ivan Zolotukhin.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="about_vao.png" position="left" >}}

### Beyond the US VAO project

Funding for the [US Virtual Astronomical Observatory](http://www.usvao.org/)
project discontinued at the end of September 2014. The legacy of the VAO will be
preserved by a combination of efforts. Starting on October 1, the NASA archives
began sustaining key components of the US VO infrastructure developed by the
VAO, including the website, the registry, and service monitors. The NASA
archives will also take an active role in the IVOA going forward.

All software, documentation, and other digital assets developed under the VAO is
stored in the
[VAO Project Repository](https://sites.google.com/site/usvirtualobservatory).
Many VAO-developed tools and services will be sustained by the organizations
that developed them within the VAO collaboration. For a complete list of these
tools and services, and more information about the VAO closeout and
continuation, please see the US VAO website
[summary](http://www.usvao.org/2014/09/22/beyond-the-vao/).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="SVO_school.JPG" position="right" >}}

### Three more VO schools in Spain

The Spanish Virtual Observatory has organized in the last months two VO schools
in research institutes (Cantabria, June 2014; Valencia; July 2014) and one
school in the framework of the Scientific Meeting of the Spanish Astronomical
Society (Teruel, September 2014) with an attendance of more than 75 people. The
main goal of the schools was to expose participants to the variety of VO tools
and services available today so that they can use them efficiently for their own
research. To achieve this goal, VO experts lecture and tutor the participants on
the usage of such tools. Real life examples of scientific applications are
given, some of them selected from the science cases proposed by the
participants. More information on these meetings can be found on the
[SVO website](http://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/docs/index.php?pagename=Meetings).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="dcworkshop.png" position="left" >}}

### First SVO workshop on data publishing

The Spanish Virtual Observatory organised in March 2014 a workshop on how to
publish data in the VO. The workshop had a twofold objective: on one hand, to
train participants on the usage of the publishing tools developed by the SVO
through "hands-on" sessions in which they learn how to develop a VO service from
scratch. On the other hand, to serve as a community-building exercise in which
SVO staff and data providers know each other, data centres describe their needs
and VO staff explains what the Virtual Observatory can offer to cover those
needs. The workshop program and corresponding presentations have been made
available at the
[SVO website](http://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/svoMeetings/index.php?mid=34&action=page&pagename=Meetings/SVO_thematic_network/First_Workshop_Datapublication_SVO/Presentation).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="ProcessDiagram_crop2.png" position="right" >}}

### Moving forward with Data Standards

The past six months have seen the recommendation of three new data standards.
These include a recommended syntax for writing the string representation of unit
labels (["VOUnits"](http://ivoa.net/documents/VOUnits/)), and the introduction
of the [Parameter Description Language (PDL)](http://ivoa.net/documents/PDL/),
which intends to be an expressive language for self-descriptive web services
exposing the semantic nature of input and output parameters. With the goal of
providing fast spatial comparisons between image coverage maps, the
[Multi-Order Coverage](http://ivoa.net/documents/MOC/) map specification reached
version 1.0. This version is based on the [HEALPix](http://healpix.jpl.nasa.gov/) 
sky tessellation algorithm, which is one way to provide a hierarchically based
spatial index.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="nova-at-ivoa.png" thumbnail="nova-at-ivoa.png" position="right" >}}

### Argentina Virtual Observatory's Data Center

The Argentina Virtual Observatory, [NOVA](http://nova.conicet.gov.ar/),
announces the release of its new database, powered by the
[GAVO DACHs](http://soft.g-vo.org/dachs) technology. Data can be queried through
specific forms at the NOVA web pages or through any VO tool such as Aladin,
SPLAT, TOPCAT, etc. The database will be fed with material collected by
Argentinian astronomers, and it is expected to grow rapidly in the following
months. Currently, the NOVA database includes a JHKs merged catalogue from the
first data release of the ESO public survey of the Milky Way bulge and southern
plane named ''VISTA variables in the Vía Láctea'' (VVV; Saito et al 2012)..

**More Information:** <http://nova.iafe.uba.ar>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="Stat_lite.png" thumbnail="Stat_lite.png" position="left" >}}

### Stat-Lite - an Android Application

VO-India has recently launched Stat-Lite - an Android application that provides
an interactive and easy introduction to the concepts of Descriptive Statistics
and Curve Plotting. It includes basic features like loading VOTable and ASCII
formatted datasets and performing some basic statistical analysis such as
correlation tests, summary statistics, etc. Some of the novel features of this
application include graphs with multi-touch gesture support allowing the user to
pan and zoom to study specific areas, and the ability to study the effect of
outliers on regression fits by adding them using a simple interface. The
interface and content has been designed for high-school and undergraduate
students. It uses 'Apache Commons Math' library for statistical calculations and
a third party charting API called 'AChartEngine' for rendering graphs. The curve
plotting module, apart from having all the major categories of pre-defined
functions, has the ability to plot any arbitrary mathematical function by
writing it down as a combination of the functions in the existing library. The
prime motivation of this development was making useful software available on
low-cost Aakash (Sky) Android tablets being made available to students in India.

**More Information:** <http://vo.iucaa.ernet.in/~voi/voandroidsl.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="searchresults.png" thumbnail="searchresults.png" position="right" >}}

### Upgrades to the US VAO registry at STScI

The VAO project has upgraded their service registry hosted at STScI, including
major underlying database changes to support evolving IVOA standard search
interfaces and familiar client tools including TOPCAT. Curation efforts are
ongoing, and the database migration includes the removal of many inactive
services across the IVOA from the registry holdings, leading to better search
results. A formal release with documentation and available code will be part of
the VAO closeout, as will a functional 'wizard'-like form-based interface for
data service curators to maintain their own registered information. A RegTAP
service based on this upgrade is in progress.

**More Information:** <http://vao.stsci.edu/directory/> is the main user-facing
search; service interfaces and further information is listed there under
‘Developers’

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="tc-cdsx1.png" thumbnail="tc-cdsx1.png" position="left" >}}

### TOPCAT and CDS X-Match

TOPCAT now provides integrated access to CDS's excellent
[X-Match](http://cdsxmatch.u-strasbg.fr/) service. This means you can easily
take a table loaded in TOPCAT and crossmatch it on sky position against any of
the tables in the VizieR or Simbad databases, covering almost all published
astronomical catalogues. It does the same job as TOPCAT's old multi-cone
function, but is _much, much_ faster, typically around a million rows a minute.
A similar function is also available from the command line using STILTS. These
matches impose no limit on table size.

**More Information:** <http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="data_discovery_tool.png" thumbnail="data_discovery_tool.png" position="right" >}}

### US VAO Data Discovery Tool: Version 1.7 released

The US VAO released a new version of the Data Discovery Tool (v1.7) on August
25, 2014. With this tool you can find datasets from thousands of astronomical
collections known to the VO and over wide areas of the sky, including thousands
of astronomical collections — photometric catalogs and images — and archives
around the world. New features of the Data Discovery Tool include: direct search
of the [Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes (MAST)](http://archive.stsci.edu/),
crossmatch search results with the major CDS catalogs via their
[X-Match](http://cdsxmatch.u-strasbg.fr/) service, or with MAST archive
observations, and upload a target list into the tool for the purpose of
crossmatching.

**More Information:** <http://vao.stsci.edu/discover>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Paper


[Orion revisited. II. The foreground population to Orion A](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...564A..29B)  
**Bouy, H.; Alves, J.; Bertin, E.; Sarro, L. M.; Barrado, D**  
_Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 564, id.A29, 12 pp. (2014)._

Aims: Following the recent discovery of a large population of young stars in
front of the Orion nebula, we carried out an observational campaign with the
DECam wide-field camera covering ≈10 deg2 centered on NGC 1980 to confirm, probe
the extent of, and characterize this foreground population of pre-main-sequence
stars. Methods: We used multiwavelength wide-field images and catalogs to
identify potential foreground pre-main-sequence stars using a novel
probabilistic technique based on a careful selection of colors and luminosities.
Results: We confirm the presence of a large foreground population towards the
Orion A cloud. This population contains several distinct subgroups, including
NGC 1980 and NGC 1981, and stretches across several degrees in front of the
Orion A cloud. By comparing the location of their sequence in various
color-magnitude diagrams with other clusters, we found a distance and an age of
380 pc and 5 ~ 10 Myr, in good agreement with previous estimates. Our final
sample includes 2123 candidate members and is complete from below the
hydrogen-burning limit to about 0.3 M⊙, where the data start to be limited by
saturation. Extrapolating the mass function to the high masses, we estimate a
total number of ≈2600 members in the surveyed region. Conclusions: We confirm
the presence of a rich, contiguous, and essentially coeval population of about
2600 foreground stars in front of the Orion A cloud, loosely clustered around
NGC 1980, NGC 1981, and a new group in the foreground of the OMC-2/3. For the
area of the cloud surveyed, this result implies that there are more young stars
in the foreground population than young stars inside the cloud. Assuming a
normal initial mass function, we estimate that between one to a few supernovae
must have exploded in the foreground population in the past few million years,
close to the surface of Orion A, which might be responsible, together with
stellar winds, for the structure and star formation activity in these clouds.
This long-overlooked foreground stellar population is of great significance,
calling for a revision of the star formation history in this region of the
Galaxy.

### Refereed Publications

* [The planetary nebula Abell 48 and its \[WN\] nucleus](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.440.1345F)  
  _Frew, David J.; Bojičić, I. S.; Parker, Q. A.; et al.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 440, Issue 2, 19 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Type Ia Supernova Rate Measurements to Redshift 2.5 from CANDELS: Searching for Prompt Explosions in the Early Universe](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014AJ....148...13R)  
  _Rodney, Steven A.; Riess, Adam G.; Strolger, Louis-Gregory; et al.  
  The Astronomical Journal, Volume 148, Issue 1, article id. 13, 28 pp. (2014)._
  
* [WTS-2 b: a hot Jupiter orbiting near its tidal destruction radius around a K dwarf](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.440.1470B)  
  _Birkby, J. L.; Cappetta, M.; Cruz, P.; et al.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 440, Issue 2, p.1470-1489(2014)._
  
* [Cataclysmic variables from the Catalina Real-time Transient Survey](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.441.1186D)  
  _Drake, A. J.; Gänsicke, B. T.; Djorgovski, S. G.; et al.  
  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 441, Issue 2, p.1186-1200 (2014)._
  
* [Chasing the Identification of ASCA Galactic Objects (ChIcAGO): An X-Ray Survey of Unidentified Sources in the Galactic Plane. I. Source Sample and Initial Results](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJS..212...13A)  
  _Anderson, Gemma E.; Gaensler, B. M.; Kaplan, David L.; et al.  
  The Astrophysical Journal Supplement, Volume 212, Issue 1, article id. 13, 35 pp. (2014)._
  
* [CoRoT 105906206: a short-period and totally eclipsing binary with a δ Scuti type pulsator](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...565A..55D)  
  _da Silva, R.; Maceroni, C.; Gandolfi, D.; et al.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 565, id.A55, 11 pp. (2014)._
  
* [The 12CO/13CO ratio in AGB stars of different chemical type. Connection to the 12C/13C ratio and the evolution along the AGB](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...566A.145R)  
  _Ramstedt, S. & Olofsson, H.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 566, id.A145, 17 pp. (2014)._
  
* [The rapid evolution of the exciting star of the Stingray nebula](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...565A..40R)  
  _Reindl, N.; Rauch, T.; Parthasarathy, M.; et al.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 565, id.A40, 14 pp. (2014)._
  
* [WINGS-SPE. III. Equivalent width measurements, spectral properties, and evolution of local cluster galaxies](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...566A..32F)  
  _Fritz, J.; Poggianti, B. M.; Cava, A.; et al.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 566, id.A32, 21 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Physical properties and evolutionary state of the Lyman alpha emitting starburst galaxy IRAS 08339+6517](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...566A..38O)  
  _Otí-Floranes, H.; Mas-Hesse, J. M.; Jiménez-Bailón, E.; et al.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 566, id.A38, 17 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Stellar laboratories. II. New Zn iv and Zn v oscillator strengths and their validation in the hot white dwarfs G191-B2B and RE 0503-289](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...564A..41R)  
  _Rauch, T.; Werner, K.; Quinet, P.; & Kruk, J. W.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 564, id.A41, 8 pp. (2014)._
  
* [IPHAS and the symbiotic stars. III. New discoveries and their IR spectral energy distributions](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...567A..49R)  
  _Rodríguez-Flores, E. R.; Corradi, R. L. M.; Mampaso, A.; et al.  
  Astronomy & Astrophysics, Volume 567, id.A49, 13 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Dwarf Galaxies in the Halo of NGC 891](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...790...76S)  
  _Schulz, Earl  
  The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 790, Issue 1, article id. 76, 13 pp. (2014)._
  
* [The Disk around the Brown Dwarf KPNO Tau 3](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...789..155B)  
  _Broekhoven-Fiene, Hannah; Matthews, Brenda; Duchêne, Gaspard; et al.  
  The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 789, Issue 2, article id. 155, 6 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Search for Bright Nearby M Dwarfs with Virtual Observatory Tools](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014AJ....148...36A)  
  _Aberasturi, M.; Caballero, J. A.; Montesinos, B.; et al.  
  The Astronomical Journal, Volume 148, Issue 2, article id. 36, 13 pp. (2014)._
  
* [Physical and dynamical properties of the main belt triple Asteroid (87) Sylvia](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Icar..239..118B)  
  _Berthier, J.; Vachier, F.; Marchis, F.; et al.  
  Icarus, Volume 239, p. 118-130 (2014)._
  
* [Distribution of CCS and HC3N in L1147, an Early Phase Dark Cloud](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...788..108S)  
  _Suzuki, Taiki; Ohishi, Masatoshi; & Hirota, Tomoya  
  The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 788, Issue 2, article id. 108, 10 pp. (2014)._

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

The [ADS query](http://labs.adsabs.harvard.edu/adsabs/search/?month_to=&db_f=astronomy&year_from=2014&bigquery=&month_from=04&q=%22virtual+observatory%22+-%22%28VO%29+forms%22+-%22VO%2C+TiO%22+-%22VO%28OH%29%22+-%22VO+band%22+-%22TiO+and+VO%22+-%22TiO%2C+VO%22&nr=&prop_f=refereed&year_to=&re_sort_type=POPULARITY&re_sort_dir=desc) we manually curate for the bibliography in this newletter.

All [ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# New VO tutorials or outreach materials

{{< side-image image="s4n1.png" thumbnail="s4n1.png" position="right" >}}

### Using Virtual Observatory with Python: querying remote astronomical databases

This tutorial is devoted to extending an existing catalogue with data taken
elsewhere, either from CDS Vizier or Simbad database. As an example, we used the
so-called 'Spectroscopic Survey of Stars in the Solar Neighborhood' (aka. S4N,
Allende Prieto et al. 2004) in order to retrieve all objects with available data
for the set of fundamental stellar parameters effective temperature, surface
gravity and metallicity. Then for each object in this dataset we query Simbad
database to retrieve the projected rotational velocity. This combines Vizier and
Simbad queries made using Python astroquery module. The tutorial covers remote
database access, filtering tables with arbitrary criteria, creating and writing
your own tables, and basics of plotting in Python.

**More information:** <http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.7026> and
[tutorial webpage](http://goo.gl/mr9wZp)

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO calendar

* **5-9 October 2014 - [ADASS XXIV](http://www.adass2014.org/)**
  
  (Calgary, Alberta, Canada)
  
  This annual conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  scientists, developers and programmers working in areas related to algorithms,
  software and systems for the acquisition, reduction, analysis, and
  dissemination of astronomical data.

* **10-12 October 2014 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://www.eventbrite.ca/e/ivoa-interop-october-2014-tickets-12227539901)**
  
  (Canadian Astronomy Data Centre, Banff, Alberta, Canada)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide for discussion and development of virtual
  observatory standards and VO-based applications, and are open to those with an
  interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and tools in support of
  observatory operations and/or astronomical research.

* **3-5 November 2014 - [Big Data Across Disciplines: In Search of Symbiosis](http://www.targetconference.eu/)**
  
  (Groningen, Netherlands)
  
  The second Target conference will bring together Big Data specialists, ICT
  researchers, e-scientists and traditional scientists from a variety of
  disciplines who will explore differences and commonalities in their approach
  to the three main stages in the Big data lifecycle.

* **12-14 November 2014 - [2014 Conference on Big Data from Space (BiDS '14)](http://congrexprojects.com/2014-events/BigDatafromSpace/introduction)**
  
  (ESRIN, Frascati, Italy)
  
  This conference aims to bring together researchers, engineers, users in the
  area of Big Data in the Space sector. The focus is on the whole data
  lifecycle, ranging from data acquisition by spaceborne and ground-based
  sensors to data management, analysis and exploitation in the domains of Earth
  Observation, Space Science, Space Engineering, Space Weather, etc.

* **8-10 December 2014 - [.Astronomy 6](http://dotastronomy.com/six/)**
  
  (Adler Planetarium, Chicago, Illinois, USA)
  
  .Astronomy (pronounced 'dot-astronomy') aims to bring together an
  international community of astronomy researchers, developers, educators and
  communicators to showcase and build web-based projects, from outreach and
  education to research tools and data analysis.

* **20-12 April 2015 - [Hubble 2020: Building on 25 Years of Discovery](http://www.stsci.edu/institute/conference/hubble25/)**
  
  (Space Telescope Science Institute · Baltimore, Maryland, USA)
  
  With an eye towards the future, this symposium will celebrate the
  extraordinary impact that the Hubble Space Telescope has had on science,
  culture, and public engagement.

* **12-15 May 2015 - [Hot-wiring the Transient Universe IV](http://hanksville.org/hotwired4/)**
  
  (Santa Barbara, California, USA)
  
  Hot-wiring the Transient Universe IV will explore opportunities and challenges
  of massively parallel time domain surveys coupled with rapid coordinated
  multi-wavelength follow-up observations. The interdisciplinary agenda includes
  future and ongoing science investigations, information infrastructure for
  publishing observations in real time, as well as novel data science to
  classify events and systems to optimize follow-up campaigns.
