---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - June 2015"
date: 2015-06-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
highlights:
- ChiVO officially launched
- LAMOST DR1 Public Release
- First IVOA Meeting in Africa
- CASSIS Spectral Tool updates
- Advanced web application for X-ray research
- New Release and upgrades to VOSA
- Iris v2.1 beta release
- Special Issue on The Virtual Observatory
- Featured Paper
- Refereed Publications
- VO calendar
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Mark G. Allen, Deborah Baines, Sarah Emery Bunn,
Chenzou Cui, August Muench, Mark Taylor & Ivan Zolotukhin.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="chivo.png" position="left" >}}

### ChiVO officially launched

On April 24th the Chilean Virtual Observatory (ChiVO) was officially launched to
the community in a seminar held at Technical University Federico Santa María,
Valparaíso, Chile.

The highlights of the seminar were:

* **First dataset:** ChiVO offers all the ALMA Cycle 0 FITS
  (<http://chivo.cl/resources/data.html>), which are accessible through the IVOA
  registry under SCS, SIA, and TAP protocols.
* **Web portal:** with information about ChiVO and a web-based interface to SCS,
  SIA, and SSA protocols (<http://www.chivo.cl>); 
* **Ongoing projects:** presentation of the prototype tools for intelligent data
  analysis, automatic source identification, and smart indexing, strongly
  focused on ALMA-like spectroscopic data cubes.
* **Community feedback:** a meeting was held with local astronomers interested
  on publishing their datasets through ChiVO, in order to explain and
  collaborate on this process.

Please note that though ChiVO is up and running, the core services will soon be
migrated to a dedicated data center for astronomy, which will allow ChiVO to
properly growth as needed.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="lamost_dr1_01.png" position="right" >}}

### LAMOST DR1 Public Release

LAMOST DR1 was released to the public in March, 2015, consisting of 2.2 million
of spectra of stars, galaxies, quasars, and other unknown types. It is the
largest astronomical spectra archive in the world. The data access system is
developed by Chinese Virtual Observatory (China-VO) under a collaboration with
LAMOST team. VO tools, such as Aladin and SpecView, and dedicated tools for
LAMOST are integrated into the web portal. Search results and spectra can be
displayed and analyzed on the fly. Large results and datasets can be retrieved
in several ways, including FTP, wget, China-VO AstroCloud storage, and VO data
access interfaces. Based on CDS X-Match Service, cross identification with
dozens of well-known catalogs is provided. List of identifiers or coordinates
supported by CDS SIMBAD and VizieR, or list of LAMOST identifiers is acceptable
to upload and search the database in batch mode. An SDSS CasJobs mirror system
is built with both SDSS DR12 and LAMOST DR1 catalogs inside.

**More information is available at:** <http://dr1.lamost.org>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="cropped-table-mountain.jpg" position="left" >}}

### First IVOA Meeting in Africa

The 2016 Northern Spring Interoperability Meeting of the IVOA will be hosted by
the South African Astroinformatics Alliance (SA3). It will be held at the
Stellenbosch Institute for Advanced Study (stias.ac.za), near Cape Town from
8-13 May 2016.

The local organizing committee comprises Sudhanshu Barway (SAAO), Lindsay Magnus
(SKA), Nazli Mohamed (SAAO), Jaquiline Rodgers (SKA), Russ Taylor (UCT, UWC),
and Patricia Whitelock (SAAO, UCT).

The meeting will be preceded by a one day workshop for South African
postgraduate students organized at the South African Astronomical Observatory
(SAAO) by SA3 with the Strasbourg Astronomical Data Centre (CDS) on 6th May
2016.

**More information is available at:** <http://ivoa2016.sa3.ac.za>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="cassis_fit.gif" thumbnail="cassis_fit.gif" position="right" >}}

### CASSIS Spectral Tool updates

A new version of CASSIS (free spectral tools) has been released. It is made
availabe as either a stand alone application
(<http://cassis.irap.omp.eu/?page=installation>), or it can be used via Java web
start technology (<http://cassis.irap.omp.eu/online/cassis.jnlp>).

The CASSIS team is also announcing a change to the architecture of the software,
and is requesting community feedback on improvements, new functionalities,
and/or scientific uses cases to be implemented in CASSIS.

To provide feedback send email to:
[cassis-team@irap.omp.eu](mailto:cassis-team@irap.omp.eu) or for specific
developers' questions, email:
[cassis-dev@irap.omp.eu](mailto:cassis-dev@irap.omp.eu). Finally, a subscription
mailing list has been created to keep users informed about recent developments
and for users to exchange their experiences. To subscribe to this list
(cassis-user@irap.omp.eu), send email to
[cassis-team@irap.omp.eu](mailto:cassis-team@irap.omp.eu).

**More Information:** <http://cassis.irap.omp.eu/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="xmm_full_1.png" thumbnail="xmm_full_1.png" position="left" >}}

### Advanced web application for X-ray research

Following the recent release of the largest catalog of X-ray sources ever
created, built from the XMM-Newton data and nicknamed 3XMM-DR5, the supporting
website has been opened. For the first time it provides an intuitive search
interface for the database of almost 400,000 X-ray sources and several advanced
features for scientific analysis such as XSPEC-style spectral fitting of a vast
collection of X-ray spectra right in a web browser. Built-in communication layer
allows creation of flexible workflows to conveniently bring images, lightcurves
and spectra of sets of X-ray objects together for detailed analysis with no
pre-installed software required. The database also has handy connections to
other X-ray archives and contains pre-computed cross-matches with common X-ray
objects catalogs to facilitate easy comparison of (yet unstudied) objects of
user interest with known CV, LMXB, HMXB, ULX, AGN and X-ray active stars. The
success of this website research model has been demonstrated during public
tutorials with quick-look discoveries made online.

**More Information:** <http://xmm-catalog.irap.omp.eu>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="vosalogo_9.png" position="right" >}}

### New Release and upgrades to VOSA

The [Spanish VO](http://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/main/index.php) will release a new
version of VOSA in June 2015. VOSA (VO Sed Analyzer) is a web-based tool
designed to build observational spectral energy distributions and to estimate
physical parameters (Teff, logg, [M/H], masses, ages, etc) from comparison with
models.

We are upgrading VOSA to give an efficient estimation of the physical parameters
of thousands of objects at a time (an order of magnitude higher compared to the
previous version). This upgrade has required the implementation of a new
distributed environment capable of submitting and processing jobs in an
asynchronous and parallelized way. An improved algorithm to detect the infrared
extinction as well as new theoretical models and observational catalogues are
some other capabilities available in the new release.

**More Information:** <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/vosa/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="Iris_logo.png" thumbnail="Iris_logo_sm.png" position="left" >}}

### Iris v2.1 beta release

We are glad to announce the Iris v2.1 beta release. The latest version of Iris
includes new, powerful analysis features, like integrating under fitted model
components, a tool for statistically combining groups of SEDs, and the ability
to arbitrarily combine template libraries and table models with other libraries,
models, and functions. For the full list of new features and known bugs, please
refer to the release notes at
<http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/iris/v2.1/releasenotes/>.

You can explore all of Iris' capabilities with the User Guide at
<http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/iris/v2.1/guide.html>.

To download: Iris is now downloaded and installed through Conda. Please refer to
the new download instructions at
<http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/iris/v2.1/download/index.html> to install Iris.

Our plan is to migrate from beta to production in the fall once the science
community has had a chance to use Iris and provide feedback.

**More Information:** <http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/iris/v2.1/releasenotes/>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Special Issue on The Virtual Observatory

A two volume special issue on the development, deployment, and impact of the
virtual observatory was published in the Astronomy & Computing Journal between
November 2014 and June 2015. Bob Hanisch (NIST) was Guest Editor. Comprising 28
articles on a wide range of services, tools, infrastructure, and management of
the virtual observatoy efforts worldwide. Complete listings of articles can be
found for [Volume 1](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/22131337/7-8)
and [Volume 2](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/22131337/11/part/PB)
on the Astronomy and Computing ScienceDirect website.

### Featured Science Publication

[Isolated compact elliptical galaxies: Stellar systems that ran away](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015Sci...348..418C)  
**Chilingarian, I. and Zolotukhin, I.**  
_Science, Volume 348, Page 418, 12 pp. (2015)._

Compact elliptical galaxies form a rare class of stellar system (~30 presently
known) characterized by high stellar densities and small sizes and often
harboring metal-rich stars. They were thought to form through tidal stripping of
massive progenitors, until two isolated objects were discovered where massive
galaxies performing the stripping could not be identified. By mining
astronomical survey data, we have now found 195 compact elliptical galaxies in
all types of environment. They all share similar dynamical and stellar
population properties. Dynamical analysis for nonisolated galaxies demonstrates
the feasibility of their ejection from host clusters and groups by three-body
encounters, which is in agreement with numerical simulations. Hence, isolated
compact elliptical and isolated quiescent dwarf galaxies are tidally stripped
systems that ran away from their hosts.

### Refereed Publications

* _[Investigating the radio-loud phase of broad absorption line quasars](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...569A..87B)_  
  Bruni, G., González-Serrano, J. I., Pedani, M., Benn, C. R., Mack, K.-H., Holt, J., Montenegro-Montes, F. M., & Jiménez-Luján, F. 2014, _Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 569, 87_
   
* _[Wide Cool and Ultracool Companions to Nearby Stars from Pan-STARRS 1](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...792..119D)_  
  Deacon, Niall R., Liu, Michael C., Magnier, Eugene A., Aller, Kimberly M., Best, William M. J., Dupuy, Trent, Bowler, Brendan P., Mann, Andrew W., Redstone, Joshua A., Burgett, William S., Chambers, Kenneth C., Draper, Peter W., Flewelling, H., Hodapp, Klaus W., Kaiser, Nick, Kudritzki, Rolf-Peter, Morgan, Jeff S., Metcalfe, Nigel, Price, Paul A., Tonry, John L., & Wainscoat, Richard J. 2014, _The Astrophysical Journal, Vol. 792, 119_
    
* _[The Role of Stellar Feedback in the Dynamics of H II Regions](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...795..121L)_  
  Lopez, Laura A., Krumholz, Mark R., Bolatto, Alberto D., Prochaska, J. Xavier, Ramirez-Ruiz, Enrico, & Castro, Daniel 2014, _The Astrophysical Journal, Vol. 795, 121_
    
* _[The expanding fireball of Nova Delphini 2013](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014Natur.515..234S)_  
  Schaefer, G. H., Brummelaar, T. Ten, Gies, D. R., Farrington, C. D., Kloppenborg, B., Chesneau, O., Monnier, J. D., Ridgway, S. T., Scott, N., Tallon-Bosc, I., McAlister, H. A., Boyajian, T., Maestro, V., Mourard, D., Meilland, A., Nardetto, N., Stee, P., Sturmann, J., Vargas, N., Baron, F., Ireland, M., Baines, E. K., Che, X., Jones, J., Richardson, N. D., Roettenbacher, R. M., Sturmann, L., Turner, N. H., Tuthill, P., van Belle, G., von Braun, K., Zavala, R. T., Banerjee, D. P. K., Ashok, N. M., Joshi, V., Becker, J., & Muirhead, P. S. 2014, _Nature, Vol. 515, 234_
    
* _[Young stellar object candidates toward the Orion region selected from GALEX](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014A%26A...572A..89S)_  
  Sanchez, Nestor, Inés Gómez de Castro, Ana, Lopez-Martinez, Fátima, & López-Santiago, Javier 2014, _Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 572, 89_
    
* _[DT Serpentis: neither a symbiotic star nor a planetary nebula associate](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.445.1605F)_  
  Frew, David J., Bento, Joao, Bojičić, Ivan S., & Parker, Quentin A. 2014, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 445, 1605_
    
* _[Mass and period limits on the ringed companion transiting the young star J1407](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.446..411K)_  
  Kenworthy, M. A., Lacour, S., Kraus, A., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Mamajek, E. E., Scott, E. L., Ségransan, D., Ireland, M., Hambsch, F.-J., Reichart, D. E., Haislip, J. B., LaCluyze, A. P., Moore, J. P., & Frank, N. R. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 446, 411_
    
* _[Sample of optically unidentified X-ray binaries in the Galactic bulge: constraints on the physical nature from infrared photometric surveys](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.446.2418Z)_  
  Zolotukhin, Ivan Yu. & Revnivtsev, Mikhail G. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 446, 2418_
    
* _[The prospective search for highly ionized technetium in hot (pre-) white dwarfs](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015A%26A...574A..29W)_  
  Werner, K., Rauch, T., Kučas, S., & Kruk, J. W. 2015, _Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 574, 29_
    
* _[New low-mass members of the Octans stellar association and an updated 30-40 Myr lithium age](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.447.1267M)_  
  Murphy, Simon J. & Lawson, Warrick A. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 447, 1267_
    
* _[Properties of Galaxies around AGNs with Most Massive Supermassive Black Hole Revealed by the Clustering Analysis](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015arXiv150308893S)_  
  Shirasaki, Yuji, Komiya, Yutaka, Ohishi, Masatoshi, & Mizumoto, Yoshihiko 2015, ArXiv e-prints,
    
* _[The small binary asteroid (939) Isberga](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015Icar..248..516C)_  
  Carry, B., Matter, A., Scheirich, P., Pravec, P., Molnar, L., Mottola, S., Carbognani, A., Jehin, E., Marciniak, A., Binzel, R. P., DeMeo, F. E., Birlan, M., Delbo, M., Barbotin, E., Behrend, R., Bonnardeau, M., Colas, F., Farissier, P., Fauvaud, M., Fauvaud, S., Gillier, C., Gillon, M., Hellmich, S., Hirsch, R., Leroy, A., Manfroid, J., Montier, J., Morelle, E., Richard, F., Sobkowiak, K., Strajnic, J., & Vachier, F. 2015, _Icarus, Vol. 248, 516_
    
* _[Fundamental parameters of the close interacting binary HD 170582 and its luminous accretion disc](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.448.1137M)_  
  Mennickent, R. E., Djurašević, G., Cabezas, M., Cséki, A., Rosales, J. G., Niemczura, E., Araya, I., & Curé, M. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 448, 1137_
    
* _[Spectral analysis of BD+30°623, the peculiar binary central star of the planetary nebula NGC 1514★](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.448.2822A)_  
  Aller, A., Montesinos, B., Miranda, L. F., Solano, E., & Ulla, A. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 448, 2822_
    
* _[The Seven Sisters DANCe. I. Empirical isochrones, luminosity, and mass functions of the Pleiades cluster](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015A%26A...577A.148B)_  
  Bouy, H., Bertin, E., Sarro, L. M., Barrado, D., Moraux, E., Bouvier, J., Cuillandre, J.-C., Berihuete, A., Olivares, J., & Beletsky, Y. 2015, _Astronomy and Astrophysics, Vol. 577, 148_
    
* _[Hundreds of new cluster candidates in the VISTA variables in the Via Lactea survey DR1](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015arXiv150502764B)_  
  Barba, R. H., Roman-Lopes, A., Nilo Castellon, J. L., Firpo, V., Minniti, D., Lucas, P., Emerson, J. P., Hempel, M., Soto, M., & Saito, R. K. 2015, ArXiv e-prints, 1505.02764
    
* _[Morphological fractions of galaxies in WINGS clusters: revisiting the morphology-density paradigm](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015MNRAS.449.3927F)_  
  Fasano, G., Poggianti, B. M., Bettoni, D., D'Onofrio, M., Dressler, A., Vulcani, B., Moretti, A., Gullieuszik, M., Fritz, J., Omizzolo, A., Cava, A., Couch, W. J., Ramella, M., & Biviano, A. 2015, _Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 449, 3927_
    
* _[Hierarchical progressive surveys. Multi-resolution HEALPix data structures for astronomical images, catalogues, and 3-dimensional data cubes](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015arXiv150502291F)_  
  Fernique, P., Allen, M. G., Boch, T., Oberto, A., Pineau, F-X., Durand, D., Bot, C., Cambresy, L., Derriere, S., Genova, F., & Bonnarel, F. 2015, ArXiv e-prints, 1505.02291

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

The [ADS query](http://labs.adsabs.harvard.edu/adsabs/search/?q=%22virtual+observatory%22+-%22%28VO%29+forms%22+-%22VO%2C+TiO%22+-%22VO%28OH%29%22+-%22VO+band%22+-%22TiO+and+VO%22+-%22TiO%2C+VO%22&month_from=10&year_from=2014&month_to=06&year_to=2015&db_f=astronomy&nr=&bigquery=) we manually curate for the bibliography in this newletter.

All [ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **15-19 June 2015 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://www.sexten-cfa.eu/en/conferences/details/54-ivoa-interoperability-workshop--spring-2015.html)**
  
  (Sexten (BZ), Italy)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide for discussion and development of virtual
  observatory standards and VO-based applications, and are open to those with an
  interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and tools in support of
  observatory operations and/or astronomical research. A programme of planned
  topics can be found here.

* **5-9 October 2015 - [Astronomical Surveys and Big Data](http://asbd.aras.am/)**
  
  (Byurakan, Armenia)
  
  A meeting “Astronomical Surveys and Big Data” dedicated to 50th anniversary of
  Markarian Survey and 10th anniversary of the Armenian Virtual Observatory
  (ArVO) will be held on Oct 5-9, 2015 in Byurakan, Armenia. We intend to
  combine astronomers and computer scientists with heavy involvement of
  astronomical surveys, catalogs, archives, databases, and virtual
  observatories. The deadline for abstract submission and registration is
  2015-06-30.

* **25-29 October 2015 - [ADASS XXV](http://www.caastro.org/event/2015-adass)**
  
  (Rydges World Square, Sydney, Australia)
  
  This annual conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  scientists, developers and programmers working in areas related to algorithms,
  software and systems for the acquisition, reduction, analysis, and
  dissemination of astronomical data. Key 2015 themes include:

  * Knowledge discovery and data management tools for astronomical Big Data
  * LSST and lessons learned from current programs
  * Algorithms for astronomical data reduction
  * Real-time processing
  * Visualization and innovative user interfaces
  * Data pipelines

* **30 October - 1 November, 2015 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpOct2015)**
  
  (Sydney, Australia)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide for discussion and development of virtual
  observatory standards and VO-based applications, and are open to those with an
  interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and tools in support of
  observatory operations and/or astronomical research.

* **3-6 November, 2015 - [.Astronomy 7](http://dotastronomy.com/events/seven/)**
  
  (Sydney, Australia)
  
  .Astronomy (pronounced 'dot-astronomy') aims to bring together an
  international community of astronomy researchers, developers, educators and
  communicators to showcase and build web-based projects, from outreach and
  education to research tools and data analysis. Interest deadline is
  2015-06-26.
