---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - June 2017"
date: 2017-06-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Deborah Baines, Jamie Anne Budynkiewicz, Theresa
Dower, Giulia Iafrate, Simon O'Toole, Maria Patterson, Li Shanshan, Yihan Tao.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="DAEPO.png" thumbnail="DAEPO_s.png" position="left" >}}

### IAU Working Group on Data Driven Astronomy Education and Public Outreach (DAEPO)

The new approved IAU Inter-Commission B2-C1-C2 WG on Data Driven Astronomy
Education and Public Outreach (DAEPO) was launched officially in April 2017. The
WG consists of 16 founding members, including the IVOA Education Interest Group,
with Chenzhou Cui as Chair.

With the development of many mega-science astronomical projects, for example
CTA, DESI, EUCLID, FAST, GAIA, JWST, LAMOST, LSST, SDSS, SKA, and large scale
simulations, astronomy has become a Big Data science. Astronomical data are not
only a necessary resource for scientific research, but also a very valuable
resource for education and public outreach (EPO), especially in the era of the
Internet and Cloud Computing. Maximizing the values of astronomical data in
education and public outreach is the mission of the WG. The WG has the major
objectives to:

- Act as a forum to discuss the value of astronomy data in EPO, the advantages
  and benefits of data driven EPO, and the challenges facing to data driven EPO
- Provide guidelines, curriculums, data resources, tools, and e-infrastructure
  for data driven EPO
- Provide best practices of data driven EPO

**More info:** <http://daepo.china-vo.org>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="interop.png" thumbnail="interop_s.png" position="right" >}}

### Shanghai IVOA Interoperability Meeting

The Northern Spring meeting of the IVOA was held on May 14-19 2017, in Shanghai,
China, under the auspices of the China-VO. This meeting also celebrated the 15th
anniversary of the IVOA, was among the best attended by the IVOA community (116
registered participants) and led to productive discussions at all levels of
participation.

Since the last Interoperability meeting (in Trieste, Italy, October 2016,) a
record 10 new standards were finalized by the Working Groups, discussed and
approved within the Technical Coordination Group of Working and Interest Group
Chairs, and approved by the IVOA Executive Committee. The IVOA has reached an
important milestone for simple cube data extraction, and is now preparing the
standards for a more complete and sophisticated manipulation of data cubes. Also
of note is the approval of the HiPS 1.0 standard, to allow large area
hierarchical mapping and display of astronomical data.

The IVOA has now two new groups: the Media Group and the Solar System Interest
Group. The Media Group is taking over the public face of the IVOA, including the
publishing of newsletters and looking at different media presences. The Solar
System Interest group will work with all IVOA working groups to review, assess
and propose IVOA standard adjustments for Solar System sciences.

The IVOA Committee on Science Priorities (CSP) tried a new approach at this
meeting: in addition to key invited presentations on major science topics and
projects, we had a series of short talks highlighting recent science/VO
developments. This format will also be used in future meetings, to facilitate
active participation by a wider scientific audience. The CSP is also looking at
widening its membership at large in the astronomical community. The IVOA
Education Interest Group is also looking at a new format, to both present a
strong IVOA representation with external bodies (including the IAU), and to
strengthen world-wide representation by including regional coordinators.

**More info:** <http://ivoa2017shanghai.csp.escience.cn>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="tutorials.png" thumbnail="tutorials_s.png" position="left" >}}

### Scientific Tutorials

A comprehensive list of scientific usage tutorials is maintained and updated by
the [Euro-VO](http://www.euro-vo.org/) at the following
[page](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials). Each tutorial
takes the user step-by-step through an example scientific use case using one or
a number of [virtual observatory tools](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/software)
(e.g. TOPCAT, Aladin, the CDS Portal, VOSA, CASSIS, ...). Scientific use cases
range from general data mining of objects, exploring Gaia data, determining
stellar physical parameters, discovering brown dwarfs, to handling
gravitational-wave sky maps for follow-up observations, and accessing and
handling big datasets with the Astronomical Data Query Language (ADQL). Many of
the tutorials have recently been updated in preparation for the
[ASTERICS](https://www.asterics2020.eu/) schools.

**More info:** <http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="SolSysVO.png" thumbnail="SolSysVO_s.png" position="right" >}}

### Solar System in the VO

Solar System sciences are now officially part of the VO. During the last Interop
Meeting in Shanghai (China), the IVOA (International Virtual Observation
Alliance) Exec committee approved the creation of a Solar System Interest Group
within the IVOA. Some IVOA standards, protocols and tools are already used for
solar and planetary sciences for data description, sharing and publishing. With
this interest group, we will review and assess IVOA standards and propose
adjustments when necessary. We will also work with large astronomical data
centers to help them sharing solar and planetary (including exoplanets) data
products more efficiently. This action is supported by the IPDA (International
Planetary Data Alliance). The Europlanet/VESPA (Virtual European Solar and
Planetary Access) project will also participate to the activities of this group.

**More info:** <http://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/IvoaSS>
**IPDA:**      <https://planetarydata.org>
**VESPA:**     <http://europlanet-vespa.eu>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="aasworkshop_s.png" position="right" >}}

### Sherpa and Iris at the 229th AAS

The Chandra X-Ray Observatory held a session on Flexible Multi-dimensional
Modeling of Complex Data in Astronomy at the 229th meeting of the American
Astronomical Society. The session used
[Sherpa](http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/contrib/sherpa/), a Python based general
modeling and fitting library for modeling multi-dimensional data, and
[Iris](http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/iris), a VO-enabled spectral energy
distribution analysis application built on top of Sherpa, as possible tools for
accessing multi-wavelength data and interpreting the results.

The workshop was broken into two parts: demonstrations, and "free time" for
attendants to follow worksheets that guided using the tools in various science
tasks. The Sherpa tutorial demonstrated basic-to-complex modeling scripts in
Jupyter notebooks, and also highlighted
[SABA](https://saba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), a Python package that bridges
Sherpa's modeling library to Astropy. The Iris demonstration focused on
aggregating datasets from online data archives, from disk, and SAMP-enabled
applications (via under-the-hood VO protocols), and data visualization and
manipulation capabilities.

Approximately 30 people attended the session, and a handful came to the Chandra
booth after the meeting to learn more about using Sherpa and Iris for their
science projects.

Presentations, worksheets, and meeting information can be found
[here](https://hea-www.harvard.edu/AstroStat/aas229_2017/modeling_ws/).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="svoschool.png" thumbnail="svoschool_s.png" position="left" >}}

### Tenth Spanish Virtual Observatory School

The Spanish Virtual Observatory project held its tenth VO school at the
Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, Spain, on 6-8 March 2017. The goal of the
school was twofold: To expose participants to the variety of VO tools and
services available today so that they can use them efficiently for their own
research; and to gather requirements and feedback from them.

Real life examples of scientific applications of VO tools and services were
given. A large fraction of the time was dedicated to hands-on exercises, which
allowed participants to become fully familiar with the VO capabilities on their
own laptops.

More information (including the hands-on tutorials) can be found at:
<http://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/meetings/escuela_svo10/>

{{</ side-image >}}

**Access more scientific usage tutorials [here](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials)**

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="CASAS.jpg" thumbnail="CASAS.jpg" position="right" >}}

### Automatic composition of astrophysical services

The semantic Web (Berneers-Lee et al. 2001) is an ongoing evolution of the
current Web, based on algorithms and knowledge formalization allowing automatic
reasoning about Web documents and services. CASAS (Composing Automatically and
Semantically Astrophysical Services) is a tool that aims to bring the semantic
web capabilities to astrophysical services, including VO and non-VO services,
data providers and data processing alike. The Web interface of CASAS allows
requesting a set of information to be retrieved from the services registered in
the ontology underlying the system. The workflow leading to the requested
information is then automatically composed, presented and may be run with the
results automatically displayed. A more in-depth view of CASAS will be available
in the next issue of the journal “Astronomy and computing” (DOI:
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ascom.2017.05.002>). Response time for this first
version may be long and the input parameters are restricted, which will be
improved in future releases.

**More Information:** <http://cta1.bagn.obs-mip.fr/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="cdsportal.png" thumbnail="cdsportal_s.png" position="left" >}}

### New version of CDS Portal

CDS has released a new version of [the CDS Portal](http://cdsportal.unistra.fr/). It can be queried for an astronomical source or position, and aggregates in a single page a summary of results from various services, such as measurements and bibliography from SIMBAD, catalogues, tabular data and photometry from VizieR, images from Aladin and more.

On the technical side, the new portal is built upon Javascript widgets querying the [MocServer](http://alasky.unistra.fr/MocServer/query) to quickly retrieve available datasets for the requested target. [Aladin Lite](http://aladin.unistra.fr/AladinLite/) is used to display data of interest ([HiPS (Hierarchical Progressive Surveys)](http://aladin.unistra.fr/hips/) images, catalogues, etc).

The underlying technologies were presented at [the May 2016 IVOA meeting](http://wiki.ivoa.net/internal/IVOA/InterOpMay2016-Apps/Apps1-TBoch-HiPS-MOC-portal.pdf).

**More Information:**
- [New CDS Portal](http://cdsportal.unistra.fr/)
- [Launch portal for target NGC 3628](http://cdsportal.unistra.fr/?target=NGC%203628)
- [Take the interactive tour to discover the portal features](http://cdsportal.unistra.fr/?guidedTour)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="clusterix.png" thumbnail="clusterix_s.png" position="right" >}}

### Clusterix

Clusterix is a new tool jointly developed by the Spanish Virtual Observatory and
the University of Barcelona (ICCUB-IEEC) whose goal is the determination of
membership probabilities in stellar clusters from proper motion data. Using VO
search protocols, the system also gathers parallaxes and radial velocities from
different services and estimate physical parameters like effective temperatures
and surface gravities using VO tools like VOSA. This information can be used to
fine-tune the proper motion-based membership probabilities.

**More information:** <http://clusterix.cab.inta-csic.es/clusterix/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="esasky.png" thumbnail="esasky_s.png" position="left" >}}

### ESASky: A science-driven discovery portal for space astronomy data

[ESASky](http://sky.esa.int/) is the multi-mission archive interface developed
at the ESAC Science Data Centre (ESDC) for exploration and discovery of the data
kept in the ESA astronomical archives and archives from other data providers.
Users can explore the sky in multiple wavelengths, quickly see the data
available for their targets and retrieve the relevant science-ready products,
with just a few clicks. The tool is completely web-based and it requires no
prior knowledge of the specific details of each mission.

ESASky features a sky exploration interface that uses AladinLite to visualise
the HiPS of the different missions, as well as a single/multiple target
interface. It is VO-compliant, allowing users to directly send their selected
products via SAMP to an open VO application. The first version was released in
May 2016, and it provided access to imaging and catalogue data. Later
incremental releases added new functionalities and data. Future releases will
enable retrieval of spectroscopic data and will incorporate features to allow
the study of Solar System objects (SSO) and time-domain exploration. A beta
version incorporating a prototype of the SSO search functionality with a limited
number of 1000 asteroids is available at <http://sky.esa.int/beta>.

**More Information:** <http://sky.esa.int> and <http://sky.esa.int/beta>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[RCSED—A Value-added Reference Catalog of Spectral Energy Distributions of 800,299 Galaxies in 11 Ultraviolet, Optical, and Near-infrared Bands: Morphologies, Colors, Ionized Gas, and Stellar Population Properties](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017ApJS..228...14C)  
**Chilingarian, Igor V.; Zolotukhin, Ivan Yu.; Katkov, Ivan Yu.; Melchior,
Anne-Laure; Rubtsov, Evgeniy V.; Grishin, Kirill A.**  
_The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series (2017) Vol. 228, Issue 2, 14, 25
pp._

We present RCSED, the value-added Reference Catalog of Spectral Energy
Distributions of galaxies, which contains homogenized spectrophotometric data
for 800,299 low- and intermediate-redshift galaxies (0.007 < z < 0.6) selected
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey spectroscopic sample. Accessible from the
Virtual Observatory (VO) and complemented with detailed information on galaxy
properties obtained with state-of-the-art data analysis, RCSED enables direct
studies of galaxy formation and evolution over the last 5 Gyr. We provide
tabulated color transformations for galaxies of different morphologies and
luminosities, and analytic expressions for the red sequence shape in different
colors. RCSED comprises integrated k-corrected photometry in up to 11
ultraviolet, optical, and near-infrared bands published by the GALEX, SDSS, and
UKIDSS wide-field imaging surveys; results of the stellar population fitting of
SDSS spectra including best-fitting templates, velocity dispersions,
parameterized star formation histories, and stellar metallicities computed for
instantaneous starburst and exponentially declining star formation models;
parametric and non-parametric emission line fluxes and profiles; and gas phase
metallicities. We link RCSED to the Galaxy Zoo morphological classification and
galaxy bulge+disk decomposition results of Simard et al. We construct the
color-magnitude, Faber-Jackson, and mass-metallicity relations; compare them
with the literature; and discuss systematic errors of the galaxy properties
presented in our catalog. RCSED is accessible from the project web site and via
VO simple spectrum access and table access services using VO-compliant
applications. We describe several examples of SQL queries to the database.
Finally, we briefly discuss existing and future scientific applications of RCSED
and prospective catalog extensions to higher redshifts and different
wavelengths.

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=11&y_in=2016&m_en=06&y_en=2017&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from November 2016 to June 2017 can be
found at the following
[list](https://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=11&y_in=2016&m_en=06&y_en=2017&submit=Submit)
(over 120 publications), curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&db_key=PRE&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=ALL&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-abs_connect?db_key=AST&qform=AST&arxiv_sel=astro-ph&arxiv_sel=cond-mat&arxiv_sel=cs&arxiv_sel=gr-qc&arxiv_sel=hep-ex&arxiv_sel=hep-lat&arxiv_sel=hep-ph&arxiv_sel=hep-th&arxiv_sel=math&arxiv_sel=math-ph&arxiv_sel=nlin&arxiv_sel=nucl-ex&arxiv_sel=nucl-th&arxiv_sel=physics&arxiv_sel=quant-ph&arxiv_sel=q-bio&sim_query=YES&ned_query=YES&aut_logic=OR&obj_logic=OR&author=&object=&start_mon=&start_year=&end_mon=&end_year=&ttl_logic=OR&title=&txt_logic=OR&text=%22virtual+observatory%22&nr_to_return=200&start_nr=1&jou_pick=NO&ref_stems=&data_and=ALL&group_and=ALL&start_entry_day=&start_entry_mon=&start_entry_year=&end_entry_day=&end_entry_mon=&end_entry_year=&min_score=&sort=SCORE&data_type=SHORT&aut_syn=YES&ttl_syn=YES&txt_syn=YES&aut_wt=1.0&obj_wt=1.0&ttl_wt=0.3&txt_wt=3.0&aut_wgt=YES&obj_wgt=YES&ttl_wgt=YES&txt_wgt=YES&ttl_sco=YES&txt_sco=YES&version=1) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **29-30 June 2017 - [Astroinformatics: From Big Data to Understanding the Universe at Large](http://eas.unige.ch/EWASS2017/session.jsp?id=S14)**
  
  (EWASS 2017, Prague, Czech Republic)
  
  Analysis and accurate interpretation of large and high dimensional data-sets
  is becoming increasingly important throughout all scientific branches covering
  scales ranging from the microscopic world of particle physics, to mega-scales
  of cosmology. Astronomy has experienced a data deluge growing from Terabytes
  to Petabytes. Besides the volume it is the complexity, and diversity, of the
  data that bring interesting challenges that border the fields of mathematics,
  statistics, computer science in general, and machine learning in particular.
  This two day symposium at the European Week of Astronomy and Space Science
  (EWASS), Prague, aims to cover aspects of Supervised, Semi-supervised, and
  Unsupervised learning, Convolutional Networks, visualization, and updates on
  various surveys through review talks, invited talks, contributed talks, panel
  discussions and posters with 1-minute lightning talks.

* **22-26 October 2017 - [ADASS XXVII](http://www.adass.cl/)**
  
  (Santiago, Chile)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXVII program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings.

* **27-29 October 2017 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/IvoaEvents)**
  
  (Santiago, Chile)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Autumn 2017 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be held in Santiago, Chile, and
  will be hosted by the Chilean VO (ChiVO).

* **7-10 November 2017 - [Astroinformatics 2017](http://astroinformatics2017.ska.ac.za/)**
  
  (Cape Town, South Africa)
  
  Astroinformatics 2017 builds on the successful series of meetings devoted to
  the growing challenge of scientific exploitation of massive and complex data
  sets from major observational projects at radio, optical and infrared
  wavelength, and from associated large-scale simulations. The meeting will
  continue the tradition to bring together astronomers, data scientists,
  statisticians, computers scientists, companies and policy makers to stimulate
  a cross-disciplinary exchange in this rapidly advancing field of research.

* **14-17 November 2017 - [.Astronomy 9](http://dotastronomy9.saao.ac.za/)**
  
  (Cape Town, South Africa)
  
  Astronomy is driven forward by new technology, and today, software is
  developing more rapidly than it ever has. How can new technologies help
  astronomical research, education, and outreach? How can new developments in
  machine learning, web interfaces, and software impact our work? The .Astronomy
  conference brings together people in astronomy, technology, and education to
  build on our strengths for a better community. The rapid growth in astronomy
  in South Africa with projects like SKA, SALT, and Office of Astronomy for
  Development makes it an exciting time to look at advances in new technologies
  along with a vibrant, growing community.

* **28-30 November 2017 - [2017 Conference on Big Data from Space (BiDS'17)](http://www.bigdatafromspace2017.org/)**
  
  (Toulouse, France)
  
  Big Data from Space refers to the massive spatio-temporal Earth and Space
  observation data collected by space-borne and ground based sensors, and to
  synergetic use of data coming from other sources and communities. This domain
  is currently facing sharp development with numerous new initiatives and
  breakthroughs ranging from intelligent sensors to data science. This is the
  third edition of the BiDS conference cycle and it will be hosted by the Centre
  National d'Études Spatiales (CNES) in Toulouse, one of the key European cities
  with activities focused on space and aerospace developments and applications.
