---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - December 2017"
date: 2017-12-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Deborah Baines, Bruce Berriman, Jamie Anne
Budynkiewicz, Theresa Dower, Giulia Iafrate, Simon O'Toole, Li Shanshan, Yihan
Tao.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="interop.png" thumbnail="interop_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### The Santiago de Chile IVOA meeting

Pepi Fabbiano, Mark Allen and Janet Evans

The October IVOA Interoperability meeting took place in Santiago, Chile, 27-29
October 2017. This was a short meeting, following the Santiago ADASS meeting,
but enjoyed the greatest attendance so far, a record 151 attended, including a
large cohort from Chile and other South American countries. This attendance
highlights the increasing importance and presence of the VO and IVOA standards
in astrophysical software.

Although short, this meeting benefited from prior discussion during the ADASS
meeting. It was characterized by high quality professional discourse and very
good presentations. The Time Domain priority area was a focus, reflecting the
increasing importance of survey and multi-messenger observations. Although no
new standards were approved in this session, after the record 10 approved in the
Spring Shanghai meeting, significant advances were achieved in the improvement
of core IVOA standards, with updates to documents in the areas of Provenance,
VODML, Grid and Web Services, DAL standards revisit, and Registry Interfaces.
IVOA related activity included an interest in large data management and
knowledge discovery, fostered by the IVOA KDD interest group, which sponsored a
bird of a feather session in the ADASS meeting. The IVOA community is also
responding to the needs of the astrophysical community at large, as evidenced by
discussions and developments in notebooks, computing near the data, and focus on
validation and monitoring of VO services.

The overall theme from both ADASS and IVOA meetings was that the VO is
everywhere!

Thanks are due to the ChileVO organizing team, led by Dr. Mauricio Solar that
made this meeting both enjoyable and productive.

**More information:** <http://www.adass.cl/#ivoa>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="ivoaslack.png" thumbnail="ivoaslack_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### IVOA Slack workspace

During the IVOA Interop meeting in Santiago, Dave Morris launched a Slack
workspace, <https://ivoa.slack.com>, as an additional means for collaboration in
the IVOA, writing: _"This is an experiment to see if Slack is a useful tool for
IVOA members to communicate. To get it started, please invite your colleagues to
join. If you are a member of a working group, please feel free to create a
channel for it."_ IVOA on Slack is slowly getting traction, as there are already
channels for GWS, KDD, Provenance, Registry, Time domain, Time series, VOEvent
and general discussions.

With new members needing an invitation to join a Slack workspace, one way to get
an invitation is asking somebody active in one of the fields of work listed
above, or else Dave Morris as the IVOA Slack workspace administrator.

There exists also a well-functioning IRC gateway, accommodating users who prefer
classical software for their on-line communication.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="adass.png" thumbnail="adass_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### DAEPO BoF Session at ADASS

On the recent ADASS conference held in Santiago, Chile, a birds of a feather
(BoF) session on Data-driven and VO-enabled Education and Citizen Science was
organized by the chair of IVOA Education Interest Group and IAU working group on
Data Driven Astronomy Education and Public Outreach (DAEPO), Dr. ChenZhou Cui.
In the BoF session, Ms. Janet Evans from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics, Secretary of the Executive Committee of the IVOA, introduced the
Virtual Observatory and the IVOA. The principal developer of the World Wide
Telescope (WWT), Mr. Jonathan Fay from Microsoft Research, gave a talk on the
history and latest development of WWT. Dr. Chenzhou Cui presented the work of
China-VO in DAEPO with examples of a citizen science project called Popular
Supernova Project (PSP) and interactive digital planetarium powered by WWT.
Participants shared their experience and discussed how to efficiently leverage
the data and VO-tools at hand to design and carry out education activities and
citizen science projects.

**More information:** <http://www.adass.cl/#program>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="ASTERICS.png" thumbnail="ASTERICS_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Third ASTERICS Virtual Observatory School

The [ASTERICS](http://asterics2020.eu/) project held its third VO school at the
Centro de Astrobiología (INTA-CSIC), Madrid, on 14-16 November 2017. The goal of
the school was twofold: to expose European astronomers and representatives of
the
[ESFRI](http://ec.europa.eu/research/infrastructures/index_en.cfm?page=esfri)
projects involved in ASTERICS to the variety of VO tools and services available
today so that they can use them efficiently for their own research; and to
gather requirements and feedback from participants.

During the first two days, VO experts gave hands-on sessions on the usage of VO tools and services using real life examples of scientific applications, which allowed participants to become fully familiar with the VO capabilities on their own laptops. The last day was then dedicated to the participants own science cases, applying what they had learnt earlier in the week.

More information can be found [here](https://www.asterics2020.eu/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=open:wp4:school3)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="gavoarvo.png" thumbnail="gavoarvo.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### GAVO-ArVO Collaboration Workshop

Under joint funding by the Armenian Ministry of Education and Science (MES) and
the German Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF), a project on
_building a high-performance research environment through German and Armenian
Astrophysical Virtual Observatories_ (GAVO and ArVO) is being run, led by
Joachim Wambsganss (German PI) and Areg Mickaelian (Armenian PI).

The project started with a visit of eight Armenian scientists and students on
23-30 November 2017, to Astronomisches Rechen-Institut – Universität Heidelberg
(ARI, Heidelberg, Germany). The workshop introduced VO standards and tools, TAP,
ADQL and the activities of GAVO to the Armenian team members. The second part of
the Workshop was devoted to the implementation of VO tools on the Digitized
First Byurakan Survey (DFBS), the main product of ArVO. The main task is the
publication of the DFBS images and spectra through the VO, i.e. creating SIAP
and SSAP services for the DFBS. Some scientific use cases were explored and
discussed.

The project will continue in 2018, when visits of German scientists and students
to Armenia and more visits of Armenian scientists and students to Germany are
planned. In addition, a workshop will be organised in Armenia, the 6th Byurakan
International Summer School (6BISS), in September 2018, and will include VO
tools training.

**Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials)**

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="aladin.png" thumbnail="aladin_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Aladin Desktop V10

The Centre de Données astronomiques de Strasbourg (CDS) is pleased to announce a
major release of Aladin Desktop v10.

Aladin Desktop is an interactive sky atlas allowing an “all-sky” approach to the
visualisation of astronomical data. Aladin V10 provides access to astronomical
image surveys with capabilities for superimposing entries from astronomical
catalogues or databases, and also providing access to related data and
information from the SIMBAD database, the VizieR service and many other VO
services.

With a new modernized and simplified look and feel interface, the main
innovation of Aladin v10 is the integration of the recent IVOA protocols (SIAv2,
TAP, Datalink/SODA, RegTAP, MOC and HiPS) and some CDS advanced services such as
the powerful CDS X-Match engine and the CDS database collection of sky coverage
maps (MocServer). This evolution opens the door to new scientific use cases —
fast browsing/filtering on all VO data collections, query by sky regions and/or
by criteria, and transparent remote cross-matching with any tables are just a
few examples of its new potentialities.

The most visible improvement of Aladin v10 is the “Access Data Tree" panel
directly available in the main window. This interactive tree enables easy
manipulation and access to the 20,000 VO data sets compatible with Aladin
including: All-sky image surveys, 3-d image cube surveys, catalogues, and
spectra collections.

[Download the Aladin v10 JAR](http://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/java/AladinV10.jar)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="esaskyv2.png" thumbnail="esaskyv2_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### ESASky v2.0

[ESASky](http://sky.esa.int/) is an open science discovery portal developed at
the ESAC Science Data Centre (ESDC) for exploration and discovery of data hosted
by the ESA astronomical archives and archives from other data providers. We are
pleased to announce the release of ESASky version 2.0. This new version includes
access to spectra from the Chandra, Herschel, HST, IUE, ISO and XMM-Newton
missions; and a search mechanism for solar system objects (SSOs) imaged by HST,
Herschel and XMM-Newton (targeted and serendipitous images). To achieve this,
the ESASky team has created a pipeline that takes the ephemeris information of
each SSO with respect to the position of each spacecraft using software by the
IMCCE (Institute of Celestial Mechanica and Ephemeris Calculations), Paris and
performs a crossmatch on the SSO orbits against the entire mission archives to
find observations in which the SSO appears within the imaging instrument's field
of view during the time the images were being taken.

Finally, version 2.0 has a new and improved user interface, designed to improve
the usability and user experience with ESASky. The new interface includes an
improved representation of available data, with numbers and treemaps (rather
than histograms); interactive footprints with the data panel; column filtering;
centring on observations and sources; SSO orbits drawn on the sky; and a share
button. Additionally, it is now possible to use ESASky in tablets and we now
provide faster access to users outside Europe.

<http://sky.esa.int/> More information [here](https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/esdc/esasky-how-to)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="aao.png" thumbnail="aao_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Introducing AAO Data Central

We are pleased to introduce Data Central, the Australian Astronomical Observatory’s new data archive system. The system is planned to be the hub for all data from AAO-supported telescopes and surveys, including raw data and high-level science products. The system can be found at <https://datacentral.aao.gov.au>.

Data Central is built upon Apache Hadoop infrastructure for data storage and uses PrestoDB as a query engine. Both these systems allow for distributed storage and querying; in particular, PrestoDB can query many different datastores, from all varieties of SQL to some noSQL systems such as MongoDB and Redis. This gives us tremendous flexibility when it comes to data access and interoperability.

We currently host the GAMA DR2 and Panchromatic DR, the SAMI galaxy survey DR1, the GALAH stellar survey DR1, the DEVILS galaxy survey DR0 and the AAT raw data archive. There are around 15 other surveys and raw data archives to be included in the system in the next 12 to 18 months.

Data Central currently offers the following services:

- Query tool
- Cone search
- Image cutout
- Spectrum viewer (coming soon)
- New Single Object Viewer (coming soon)

We also provide or will soon provide the following IVOA services:

- TAP service — <https://datacentral.aao.gov.au/vo/tap>
- Simple Cone Search (coming soon)
- Simple Image Access (coming soon)
- Simple Spectrum Access (coming soon)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="vospaces.png" thumbnail="vospaces_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Interoperable geographycally distributed VOSpaces

A collaboration between the Trieste Astronomical Observatory of Italian National
Institute of Astrophysics (OATs-INAF) and the Canadian Astronomy Data Center
(CADC) of the National Research Council Canada, has taken a new step toward the
global Virtual Observatory. A set of services based on IVOA standards and
recommendations has been deployed using open-source available software
(<https://github.com/opencadc> and <https://github.com/oats-cadc>).
Interoperability tests involving Authentication, Authorization, Data Access and
Movement have been successfully concluded. A pre-production test-bed providing
services accessibility in a cloud environment is available at OATs-INAF
(<https://cloud.oats.inaf.it>). All the software used has been fully documented
(<https://goo.gl/3fq5na>) offering the opportunity to replicate a similar set of
services and to interoperate them with the already existing one. Specifically, a
storage management solution, called vospace-backend, interfaced with the CADC
VOSpace interface implementation, has been developed. It provides support for
posix-based and OpenStack Swift storage solutions, but its plug-in architecture
easily allows the support to other storage solutions with minimal development
effort.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="climso.png" thumbnail="climso_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Solar Survey at Pic du Midi Observatory

The CLIMSO solar survey started in 2007 and is expected to extend for many more
years. All the data (images and films) can be downloaded from
<http://climso.irap.omp.eu/data/index.html>. This survey is done with four
instruments (two coronagraphs and two solar refractors) that take images of the
whole solar disc and prominences every minute (weather permitting), and the
corona every hour. The Pic du Midi site in the French Pyrenees allows for a very
good seeing and relatively frequent coronal skies.

The covered spectral channels are :

- whole solar disk at λ= 656.28nm Δλ=0.05nm (H-α), 15 cm refractor
- solar prominences at λ= 656.28nm Δλ=0.25nm (H-α), 20 cm coronagraph
- whole solar disk at λ= 393.3nm Δλ=0.25nm (Ca II), 9 cm refractor
- solar prominences at λ= 1068.0nm Δλ=0.25nm (He I), 20 cm coronagraph
- solar corona at λ= 1074.7nm Δλ=0.25nm (Fe XIII), 20 cm coronagraph

The FITS images (2048*2048 pixels) are preprocessed and presented in a way that
comply with the VO standards. They are calibrated in physical units for the
whole disk images, and simply normalized for the prominences and corona images.

**More information:** <http://climso.irap.omp.eu/data/index.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="topcat.png" thumbnail="topcat_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### TOPCAT v4.5

[TOPCAT](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/) is an interactive graphical desktop
application for working with source catalogues and other tables. It provides VO
access, crossmatching, visualisation and many other features. It comes with a
sister application, [STILTS](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/stilts/), that lets you
do all the same things from the command line. STILTS is very useful for
scripting and reproducible work such as preparing plots for publication, but
harder to learn than TOPCAT's point and click interface. The recent v4.5 release
of TOPCAT has a
[new control](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/sun253/StiltsControl.html) that
displays the STILTS command to reproduce the current plot, either on the screen
or to a graphics format like PNG or PDF. This lets you set up a plot
interactively and then save the command for later scripting and adjustments.

**More information:** <http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[Gaia TGAS search for Large Magellanic Cloud runaway supergiant stars. Candidate hypervelocity star discovery and the nature of R 71](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017A%26A...603A..75L)  
**Lennon, Daniel J.; van der Marel, Roeland P.; Ramos Lerate, Mercedes; O'Mullane, William; Sahlmann, Johannes**  
_Astronomy and Astrophysics (2017) Vol. 228, Volume 603, A75_

Aims: Our research aims to search for runaway stars in the Large Magellanic
Cloud (LMC) among the bright Hipparcos supergiant stars included in the Gaia DR1
Tycho-Gaia astrometric solution (TGAS) catalogue. Methods: We compute the space
velocities of the visually brightest stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud that
are included in the TGAS proper motion catalogue. This sample of 31 stars
contains a luminous blue variable (LBV), emission line stars, blue and yellow
supergiants, and an SgB[e] star. We combine these results with published radial
velocities to derive their space velocities, and by comparing with predictions
from stellar dynamical models we obtain each star's (peculiar) velocity relative
to its local stellar environment. Results: Two of the 31 stars have unusually
high proper motions. Of the remaining 29 stars we find that most objects in this
sample have velocities that are inconsistent with a runaway nature, being in
very good agreement with model predictions of a circularly rotating disk model.
Indeed the excellent fit to the model implies that the TGAS uncertainty
estimates are likely overestimated. The fastest outliers in this subsample
contain the LBV R 71 and a few other well known emission line objects though in
no case do we derive velocities consistent with fast (100 km s{{< sup -1 >}})
runaways. On the contrary our results imply that R 71 in particular has a
moderate deviation from the local stellar velocity field (40 km s{{< sup -1 >}})
lending support to the proposition that this object cannot have evolved as a
normal single star since it lies too far from massive star forming complexes to
have arrived at its current position during its lifetime. Our findings therefore
strengthen the case for this LBV being the result of binary evolution. Of the
two stars with unusually high proper motions we find that one, the isolated
B1.5 Ia{{< sup "\+" >}} supergiant Sk-67 2 (HIP 22237), is a candidate
hypervelocity star, the TGAS proper motion implying a very large peculiar
transverse velocity (360 km s{{< sup -1 >}}) directed radially away from the LMC
centre. If confirmed, for example by Gaia Data Release 2, it would imply that
this massive supergiant, on the periphery of the LMC, is leaving the galaxy
where it will explode as a supernova.

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=07&y_in=2017&m_en=12&y_en=2017&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from July 2017 to December 2017 can be
found at the following
[list](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=07&y_in=2017&m_en=12&y_en=2017&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **7-12 January 2018 - [231st AAS Meeting](https://aas.org/meetings/aas231)**
  
  (Washington, DC, USA)
  
  The American Astronomical Society (AAS) meetings serve as a venue for the
  general astronomical community to gather and discuss the latest science,
  tools, and technologies in astronomy. At the 231st AAS Meeting, there will be
  a couple of VO-related sessions and exhibits, including presentations from
  international VO partners, open to all astronomers. On Jan. 7 at 10:00 am,
  EST, NASA Astronomical Virtual Observatories will be leading a workshop on
  accessing the NASA astrophysical archives via Python tools. On Monday, Jan. 8,
  the USVOA will be holding an open meeting from 2:00-3:30pm, during which the
  latest US-based VO efforts will be presented by partner institutes, new demos
  shown, and current/future VO tasks discussed. IVOA affiliated institutions
  will have booths in the exhibition hall throughout the week, demonstrating
  tools and services such as the NASA Astrophysics Data System, SciServer,
  VizieR, and other VO data access interfaces. Attendees may learn more about
  the data and services provided by those institutions, and have face-to-face
  discussions with developers.

* **4-5 April 2018 - [Software in astronomy](http://eas.unige.ch/EWASS2018/session.jsp?id=S6)**
  
  (EWASS 2018, Liverpool, UK)
  
  This Symposium will provide information on software engineering skills that
  are useful for and reasonably attainable by astronomy researchers and cover
  some of the best practices in software development. It will cover the issues
  that arise from having a poor rewards system for software contributions and
  efforts to improve this situation and will present useful codes that are
  available for use by researchers. It will analyse and discuss the problems of
  balancing the incoming data deluge with well-proportioned Astroinformatics
  solutions, based on robust and efficient processing/simulation environments
  and scalable data analytics methods. It will also invite engagement between
  the widest European community of astronomers and space scientists with the
  agencies large and small that provide archival data and associated services.

* **28 May - 1 June 2018 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](http://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2018MeetingtPage)**
  
  (Victoria, Canada)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Spring 2018 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be held in Victoria,
  Canada, and will be hosted by the CADC.

* **8-10 November 2018 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpNov2018MeetingPage)**
  
  (College Park, Maryland, USA)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2018 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be held in College Park,
  Maryland, USA, and will be hosted by the USVOA.

* **11-15 November 2018 - [ADASS XXVII](http://adass2018.astro.umd.edu/)**
  
  (College Park, Maryland, USA)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXVIII program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings.
