---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - August 2018"
date: 2018-08-01T00:01:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Deborah Baines, Bruce Berriman, Jamie Anne
Budynkiewicz, Theresa Dower, Giulia Iafrate, Shanshan Li, Simon O'Toole, Yihan
Tao.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="GaiaDR2.png" thumbnail="GaiaDR2_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Gaia DR2 and the VO: A two-way success story

When, on 25th April at 12:00 sharp, thousands of astronomers opened TOPCAT,
searched for “Gaia DR2” and found four services (ARI, CDS, ESA, GAVO) willing to
answer significantly complex queries over the impressive 1.7 billion source
catalogue, very few were aware that perhaps the most intensive and decisive
operational test since the formation of the VO in 2002 was running at that
precise moment.

And it was a successful test. The VO behaved as good technology should behave:
transparent to the users whilst empowering them to perform scientific queries
without noticing the complexity of the standards and technologies served behind
the tools. These include writing queries in a common, open IVOA standard (ADQL;
Astronomical Data Query Language), accepted by all services; sending data
through interoperable applications with one click with SAMP (Simple Application
Mesaging Protocol); saving and sharing data through VOSpace services; and data
distribution through DataLink.

As well as using [TOPCAT](http://www.star.bris.ac.uk/~mbt/topcat/), many users
decided to use the
[ESA Gaia Archive interface](http://archives.esac.esa.int/gaia), Partner Data
Centres interfaces at:
[Centre de Données astronomiques de Strasbourg (CDS)](http://cds.unistra.fr/gaia),
[Astronomisches Rechen-Institut (ARI)](http://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/),
[Leibniz-Institute for Astrophysics Potsdam (AIP)](https://gaia.aip.de/) and the
[ASI Space Science Data Center (SSDC)](http://gaiaportal.asdc.asi.it/), other VO
tools, or the specifically developed
[Python Astroquery Gaia library](http://astroquery.readthedocs.io/en/latest/gaia/gaia.html).
Usage numbers for the first week speak for themselves: 34000 users accessed the
ESA Gaia Archive interface with peaks of 1700 new users per hour, over 5000
users sending more than 1.5 million data analysis queries and a total data
retrieval of 118 TB.

The VO-orientation of the ESA Gaia archive and partner archives and services is
the result of many years of involvement of ESA and the Gaia partner data centres
in the IVOA, and of the contributions through the
[Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC)](http://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dpac)
of many partners and experts. VO technologies are now "release proven" (i.e. can
accept very large peak loads), combining reliability with functionality, and
making them an attractive option for future missions and projects.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="interop.png" thumbnail="interop_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### IVOA meeting in Victoria, BC, Canada

The Northern Spring meeting of the IVOA took place in Victoria, BC, Canada,
between 27 May and 1 June 2018. This meeting was hosted by the Canadian
Astronomy Data Centre (CADC).

In this meeting we had the first IVOA Hackathon, organized by the Data Model
Working Group. This Hackathon provided useful feedback to the data modelers as
well as informing the participants of available software tools. General
consensus was that similar hands on sessions should become a standing feature of
IVOA meetings.

The IVOA Committee for Science Priorities organized a special session with
representatives of the Astropy community, to foster increasing collaboration
between Data Center/Archive data providers and the astronomy user community. The
IVOA will make increasing use of GitHub for standards development, to make them
more visible to astronomers at large. Development of Python software based on
IVOA standards was also discussed.

The IVOA will host a booth at the upcoming IAU meeting in Vienna. All are
invited for discussions and demonstrations of tools and interfaces.

**More information:** <http://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2018MeetingtPage>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="ChinaVO.png" thumbnail="ChinaVO_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### China-VO Alibaba Astronomy Party and LAMOST Spectrum Data Mining Competition

China-VO has recently made some efforts to promote Information Technology and
data mining in astronomy. On 10-11 April, China-VO and Alibaba Cloud jointly
organized an astronomy party in the Alibaba Group headquarter in Hangzhou,
China. The party aimed to connect astronomers with IT experts in industry and
find partners to help with the technical issues in their research projects.
Researchers from nine astronomy research institutes in different area of China
participated in the party and brought about 40 astronomical research projects
and technical requirements, e.g. FAST pulsar searches, exoplanet searches, etc.
More than 50 volunteers from various divisions of the Alibaba group, who are
keen on astronomy, joined the party. Online discussion groups have formed since
the party on different technical aspects, including web crawlers, machine
learning, engineering, and big data processing.

From February to May 2018, an Algorithm Competition on spectral classification
was organized by China-VO and Alibaba Cloud. Around 1000 people (over 800 teams)
from the public have participated in the competition, applying machine learning
techniques on LAMOST spectral datasets to automatically classify the spectra
into stars, galaxies, quasars and unknowns. The winning team employs deep neural
networks to solve the problem and achieves an overall macro-F1 score of 0.83.

These activities are new attempts of China-VO in terms of bridging astronomers
with the technical community and combining astronomy research with public
science in ways that both astronomers and the general public could benefit from.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="navo.png" thumbnail="navo_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### NAVO python session at 232nd AAS

Representatives from the NASA Astronomy Virtual Observatory (NAVO) conducted a
workshop at the 232nd American Astronomical Society Meeting in Denver. Forty
students registered for "Using Python to Search NASA's Astrophysics Archives",
and spent 1.5 hours working through Jupyter notebooks illustrating how to access
Virtual Observatory resources to study a sample of interacting galaxies.
Examples included queries of the NAVO Directory, Simple Cone Search, Table
Access Protocol, Simple Image Access, and Simple Spectral Access. Given the high
demand, NAVO plans to offer workshops at future AAS meetings.

**Workshop materials:** <https://github.com/NASA-NAVO/aas_workshop_2018_summer>

{{</ side-image >}}

**Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials)**

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="csc2.png" thumbnail="csc2_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Chandra Source Catalog (CSC 2.0)

The second major release of the Chandra Source Catalog (CSC 2.0) is approaching
completion, and access to data that have completed processing is currently
possible through the CSCview user interface. CSC 2.0 will roughly triple the
size of the current version of the catalog to an estimated 375,000 X-ray
detections, corresponding to ~315,000 unique X-ray sources on the sky. For each
detected X-ray source, the catalog provides a detailed set of properties
including the source position and associated position error ellipse, source
extent, multi-band aperture photometry probability density functions, spectral
fits using several source models, hardness ratios, and intra- and
inter-observation temporal variability measures. All numerical measures have
associated two-sided confidence intervals. In addition to tabular data, the
catalog provides FITS data products that are immediately suitable for further
user analysis, including per-field and per-source images, source region
polygons, photon event lists, responses, spectra, and light curves.

Access to the version 1.1 release of the catalog is also possible through IVOA
compliant SIAP, SCS, and TAP interfaces. Once version 2.0 is officially
released, the new versions of the catalog will also be accessible through these
interfaces.

This work has been supported by NASA under contract NAS 8-03060 to the
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory for operation of the Chandra X-ray Center.

For more information see the CSC 2.0 website at <http://cxc.harvard.edu/csc2/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="Chandra_MOCs.png" thumbnail="Chandra_MOCs_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Chandra adoption of Multi-Order Coverage maps (MOCs)

As Chandra approaches its 20th year of operation, the total fraction of sky
observed is nearing the 2.2% mark. A map showing the footprints of all Chandra
public observations would resemble a large and sparse collection of isolated
rectangular shapes, a few islands of closely and orderly positioned tiles and a
patchwork of large, often connected regions, typically associated with
structures in the nearby Universe.

Now, such a map (and more) is available for everyone to admire and work with at
<http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/cda/cda_moc.html> !

In order to help astronomers interested in the coverage properties of Chandra
data, the Chandra Data Archive (CDA) has recently generated and made available
up-to-date Multi-Order Coverage maps (MOCs) of Chandra archival observations at
different maximum spatial resolutions. These MOCs, described by the IVOA
standard, combine the field-of-views of the distinct observations into a
conveniently compressed global representation of their coverage. MOCs are
optimized for interactive exploration but can also be used to filter lists of
positions based on their positions relative to the Chandra footprint. Morever,
MOCs make it easy to estimate the global properties of the Chandra coverage
(i.e. total area), and apply boolean operators to the Chandra footprint and the
footprints of other observations. These operations can be performed either via
GUI tools such as TOPCAT and Aladin Desktop, or programmatically, using
MOC-compatible libraries such as STILTS or Python libraries MOCPy and PyMOC.

MOCs will complement the other Chandra data access interfaces and services by
providing a novel representation of the geometric properties of the Chandra
archival observations, thus making the X-ray Universe seen by Chandra more
easily discoverable and explorable.

**More information:** <http://cxc.cfa.harvard.edu/cda/cda_moc.html>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="Gaia-DR2-flux-map.png.1" thumbnail="Gaia-DR2-flux-map.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Gaia DR2 in CDS Services

Gaia DR2 data are available since April 25th in CDS services: VizieR, Aladin,
Sesame and the CDS cross-matching service.

In addition to the
[regular VizieR interface](http://vizier.u-strasbg.fr/viz-bin/VizieR?-source=I/345),
VO access is provided through cone search queries and through TAP allowing the
user to formulate SQL-like queries from our
[web interface](http://tapvizier.u-strasbg.fr/adql/?I/345) or from any TAP
client (Topcat or TAPHandle for instance). For power users, a command-line tool
[find_gaia_dr2](http://cds.u-strasbg.fr/resources/doku.php?id=cdsclient:doc-find_gaia_dr2)
allows users to query Gaia DR2 by position, source ID or by constraints on the
parallax, proper motions, fluxes, etc.

Aladin Desktop features a dedicated form for easy access to Gaia data and
visualisation of proper motions.

The cross-match service offers fast spatial cross-identifications of Gaia data
with VizieR 18,000+ tables with positions or user-uploaded tables. Access to the
cross-match is done either [via our web page](http://cdsxmatch.u-strasbg.fr/) or
via Topcat.

Gaia DR2 has also been made available as HiPS progressive catalogues, seamlessly
browsable from Aladin Desktop and Aladin Lite as demonstrated here:
<http://cds.unistra.fr/Gaia/DR2/AL-visualisation.gml>, including a HiPS density
map and a color flux map created by CDS from the Gaia catalogue.

**More information:** <http://cds.unistra.fr/GaiaDR2News>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="hipass.png" thumbnail="hipass_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### HIPASS legacy data set now available through ASKAP’s new archive facility

The CASDA team are pleased to announce that HIPASS cubes are now available in
the CSIRO ASKAP Science Data Archive (CASDA).

CASDA is a collaboration between CASS, CSIRO IM&T, and the Pawsey Supercomputing
Centre, to build a data archive for the Australian Square Kilometre Array
Pathfinder (ASKAP). It will provide long term storage for Australian SKA
Pathfinder (ASKAP) data products, and serve those to astronomers around the
world using both virtual observatory (VO) and web-based portal services.

The `HI Parkes All Sky Survey' (HIPASS) is a legacy dataset of much interest and
value to the community. The dataset covers the whole southern sky, and northern
declinations to +25 deg. HIPASS was carried out from 1997 to 2002 with the
Australia Telescope National Facility's Parkes 64-m telescope.

CASDA provides full cube download, subcube and spectra cutout facilities
utilizing the multi-dimensional VO protocols (SIA2, Datalink and SODA). You can
access the HIPASS collection at:
<https://data.csiro.au/dap/landingpage?pid=csiro:32333> or through CASDA’s VO
interface. Please refer to the readme file attached to the collection for more
detailed information on the HIPASS data in this collection.

**More information:** <https://data.csiro.au/dap/landingpage?pid=csiro:32333>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="VOSA.png" thumbnail="VOSA_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### VOSA New Release and Gaia DR2

The Spanish VO released a new version of VOSA (v6.0) in April 2018. VOSA (VO Sed
Analyzer) is a web-based tool designed to build observational spectral energy
distributions and to estimate physical parameters (Teff, logg, [M/H], masses,
ages, etc) from comparison with models. In the last five years more than 1500
users have analysed five million objects and have published more than 150
refereed papers using VOSA.

New photometric catalogues and collections of theoretical models, new
visualization tools and an asynchronous management of the input files to avoid
long waits with heavy files are some of the functionalities implemented in this
new version.

Special attention deserves to be given to the upgrades made to deal with Gaia
DR2 data. Photometric information (G, Bp, Rp magnitudes) converted to fluxes
using the SVO Filter Profile Service
(<http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/fps3>) as well as parallaxes can now be
used in the VOSA workflow.

**More information:** <http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/theory/vosa/>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[The Gaia-ESO Survey and CSI 2264: Substructures, disks, and sequential star formation in the young open cluster NGC 2264](http://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#abs/2018A&A...609A..10V/abstract)  
**Venuti, L.; Prisinzano, L.; Sacco, G. G.; Flaccomio, E.; Bonito, R.; Damiani, F.; Micela, G.; Guarcello, M. G.; Randich, S.; Stauffer, J. R.; Cody, A. M.; Jeffries, R. D.; Alencar, S. H. P.; Alfaro, E. J.; Lanzafame, A. C.; Pancino, E.; Bayo, A.; Carraro, G.; Costado, M. T.; Frasca, A. Jofré, P.; Morbidelli, L.; Sousa, S. G. and Zaggia, S.**  
_Astronomy and Astrophysics (2018) Volume 609, A10_

Context. Reconstructing the structure and history of young clusters is pivotal
to understanding the mechanisms and timescales of early stellar evolution and
planet formation. Recent studies suggest that star clusters often exhibit a
hierarchical structure, possibly resulting from several star formation episodes
occurring sequentially rather than a monolithic cloud collapse.

Aims: We aim to explore the structure of the open cluster and star-forming
region NGC 2264 ( 3 Myr), which is one of the youngest, richest and most
accessible star clusters in the local spiral arm of our Galaxy; we link the
spatial distribution of cluster members to other stellar properties such as age
and evolutionary stage to probe the star formation history within the region.

Methods: We combined spectroscopic data obtained as part of the Gaia-ESO Survey
(GES) with multi-wavelength photometric data from the Coordinated Synoptic
Investigation of NGC 2264 (CSI 2264) campaign. We examined a sample of 655
cluster members, with masses between 0.2 and 1.8 M☉ and including both
disk-bearing and disk-free young stars. We used Teff estimates from GES and
g,r,i photometry from CSI 2264 to derive individual extinction and stellar
parameters.

Results: We find a significant age spread of 4-5 Myr among cluster members.
Disk-bearing objects are statistically associated with younger isochronal ages
than disk-free sources. The cluster has a hierarchical structure, with two main
blocks along its latitudinal extension. The northern half develops around the
O-type binary star S Mon; the southern half, close to the tip of the Cone
Nebula, contains the most embedded regions of NGC 2264, populated mainly by
objects with disks and ongoing accretion. The median ages of objects at
different locations within the cluster, and the spatial distribution of disked
and non-disked sources, suggest that star formation began in the north of the
cluster, over 5 Myr ago, and was ignited in its southern region a few Myr later.
Star formation is likely still ongoing in the most embedded regions of the
cluster, while the outer regions host a widespread population of more evolved
objects; these may be the result of an earlier star formation episode followed
by outward migration on timescales of a few Myr. We find a detectable lag
between the typical age of disk-bearing objects and that of accreting objects in
the inner regions of NGC 2264: the first tend to be older than the second, but
younger than disk-free sources at similar locations within the cluster. This
supports earlier findings that the characteristic timescales of disk accretion
are shorter than those of disk dispersal, and smaller than the average age of
NGC 2264 (i.e., ≲3 Myr). At the same time, we note that disks in the north of
the cluster tend to be shorter-lived ( 2.5 Myr) than elsewhere; this may reflect
the impact of massive stars within the region (notably S Mon), that trigger
rapid disk dispersal.

Conclusions: Our results, consistent with earlier studies on NGC 2264 and other
young clusters, support the idea of a star formation process that takes place
sequentially over a prolonged span in a given region. A complete understanding
of the dynamics of formation and evolution of star clusters requires accurate
astrometric and kinematic characterization of its population; significant
advance in this field is foreseen in the upcoming years thanks to the ongoing
Gaia mission, coupled with extensive ground-based surveys like GES.

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=01&y_in=2018&m_en=07&y_en=2018&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from January to June 2018 can be found
at the following
[list](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=01&y_in=2018&m_en=07&y_en=2018&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **20-31 August 2018 - [XXXth General Assembly of the International Astronomical Union](http://astronomy2018.univie.ac.at/)**
  
  (University of Vienna, Austria)
  
  The next IAU General Assembly is taking place in Vienna, Austria and will last
  for two five-day sessions spread over two weeks. This event is a unique
  opportunity for astronomers worldwide working in all fields of astronomy to
  come together. In addition to the core administrative meetings, the General
  Assembly also includes a substantial and attractive scientific programme. This
  comprises of seven Symposia, each lasting an average of three days, and
  fifteen specialized Focus Meetings. In addition, two full days are reserved
  for Division Meetings, with no overlap with the general program.

  The IVOA will be exhibiting at the assembly as well as a number of IVOA member
  groups. Come to the IVOA booth to talk with the specialists and ask for
  demonstrations of tools and interfaces!

* **24-27 September 2018 - [.Astronomy X](https://www.dotastronomy.com/)**
  
  (STScI, Baltimore, USA)
  
  The .Astronomy conference series aims to build a dynamic and creative
  community of scientists and educators to exploit the potential offered by
  modern computing and the internet in the era of data-driven astronomy. Rather
  than scientific questions, the focus is on innovative use of the web to
  develop new research tools, and to communicate with a broad audience through
  online platforms and innovative engagement resources. .Astronomy provides
  scientists, developers and science communicators an opportunity to showcase
  their ideas and skills outside their institutes or research areas, and help
  them get credit for their work. The conference venue, the Space Telescope
  Science Institute in Baltimore, is a global centre for space astronomy: the
  hub of Hubble, and the home of its golden heir, the James Webb Space
  Telescope. STScI hosts MAST, the Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes, which
  makes data available to the community from numerous other missions and
  projects, such as Kepler, TESS and PanSTARRS. We’ll be incorporating the theme
  of space into our sessions.

* **8-10 November 2018 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpNov2018MeetingPage)**
  
  (College Park, Maryland, USA)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2018 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be held in College Park,
  Maryland, USA, and will be hosted by the USVOA.

* **11-15 November 2018 - [ADASS XXVII](http://adass2018.astro.umd.edu/)**
  
  (College Park, Maryland, USA)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXVIII program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings.

* **20-22 November 2018 - [Fourth ASTERICS Virtual Observatory School](https://www.asterics2020.eu/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=open:wp4:school4)**
  
  (Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France)
  
  The goal of the Fourth ASTERICS Virtual Observatory School is twofold: Expose
  European astronomers and representatives of the ESFRI project involved in
  ASTERICS to the variety of VO tools and services available today so that they
  can use them efficiently for their own research and gather requirement and
  feedback from them. To achieve these goals, VO experts will lecture and tutor
  the participants on the usage of VO tools and services. Real life examples of
  scientific applications will be given. A large fraction of the time will be
  dedicated to hands-on exercises, which will allow participants to become fully
  familiar with the VO capabilities on their own laptops.

{{< newsletter-social-links >}}