---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - September 2019"
date: 2019-09-01T02:00:00+02:00
tags:
- news
highlights:
- IVOA Interoperability meeting in Paris, France
- A search engine for the IVOA documentation.
- Creating High Quality HiPS Visualizations With Montage
- Exo-MerCat, a VO-aware exoplanet catalog
- LAMOST Releases the Fifth Data Release (DR5) Internationally
- pyESASky: An ESASky widget for Jupyter
- Featured Science Publication
- Featured Paper
- Refereed Publications
- VO calendar
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Deborah Baines, Bruce Berriman, Jamie Anne
Budynkiewicz, Theresa Dower, Giulia Iafrate, Shanshan Li, Simon O'Toole, Yihan
Tao.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="interop.png" thumbnail="interop_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### IVOA Interoperability meeting in Paris, France

The Northern Spring meeting of the IVOA took place in Paris, France at the Paris
Observatory between 12-17 May 2019. The meeting was hosted by the
[Paris Astronomical Data Centre](https://padc.obspm.fr/) and
[Observatoire Virtuel France (OV-France)](http://www.france-ov.org/), and
gathered 131 participants from around the world for a full schedule of events
covering many aspects of the development and use of the Virtual Observatory.

The Interop was centred around the sessions of the IVOA Working- and
Interest-Groups which are the essential face-to-face working meetings of these
groups for the development of IVOA standards, and also for reporting of feedback
from implementations.

The IVOA Committee for Science Priorities organized a Focus Session on Big Data
Challenges where representatives from LSST, SKA, MAST and the ESA Gaia and
Euclid missions outlined their data exploitation plans. The presentations and
discussions showed that VO compliance is well integrated into their plans, and
that the development of science analysis platforms is a strong common theme.

A special ‘experimental’ event at this Interop was the Astropy-VO
Sprint/Hackathon which gathered participants from the Astropy project and VO
projects to work together on specific improvements to the interoperability of
the VO within Astropy, and as a way to build stronger connections between VO and
Astropy.

A plenary session of the Solar System Interest Group welcomed the participation
of representatives from the IPDA (International Planetary Data Alliance) and
also new participation from Solar Physics projects. The International
Planetarium Society made a plenary presentation, and other new participants
included a representative from EUDAT.

Many thanks are due to the local organisers (lead by Baptise Cecconi and Pierre
Le Sidaner), and to sponsors Europlanet, the French Space Agency (CNES) and
CNRS-INSU/ASOV. Furthermore the effort by the organisers to minimise the
environmental impact via use of reusable/recyclable materials and a local
sustainable procurement was highly appreciated.

**More information:**
[May 2019 Interop Meeting Page](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2019MeetingPage)

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="SVOSchool.png" thumbnail="SVOSchool_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### XIII Spanish Virtual Observatory School

The Spanish Virtual Observatory held their 13th VO School at the Complutense
University of Madrid in Madrid on 4-5 March 2019. The goal of the school was
twofold: (1) to expose participants to the variety of VO tools and services
available today so that they can use them efficiently for their own research,
and (2) to gather requirements and feedback from participants.

To achieve these goals, VO experts lectured and tutored the participants on the
usage of VO tools and services. Real life examples of scientific applications
were given. A large fraction of the time was dedicated to hands-on exercises,
which allowed participants to become fully familiar with the VO capabilities on
their own laptops.

**More information:**
[XIII SVO School](http://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/svoMeetings/index.php?mid=46&action=page&pagename=Meetings/SVO_thematic_network/Decimotercera_Escuela_SVO/Presentation)

{{</ side-image >}}

**Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials)**

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="DocSearch.png" thumbnail="DocSearch_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### A search engine for the IVOA documentation.

We provide a web application for textual search within both IVOA recommendations
and notes. The objective is to guide users toward the documents answering their
questions. Documents are all downloaded from the IVOA documents page. They are
then split into small parts that are indexed by Elastic Search. Users can then
retrieve the text sections matching the searched words.

**More information:** <http://saada.unistra.fr/esdoc/interfacePDF.html?index=ivoa#>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="montage.png" thumbnail="montage_s.png" caption="A 3-color map of a 6° region of ρ Ophiuchus in WISE bands W1, W3 and W4 (3.4, 12 and 22 μm) at ~10 arcsecond resolution (HiPS level 5)." position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Creating High Quality HiPS Visualizations With Montage

Version 5 of the Montage image mosaic engine provided support for the HEALPix
sky tesselation scheme. Extending this capability to support HiPS, which is
based on HEALPix, is an obvious development for Montage. We provide here a
status report on a collaboration with IRSA to use Montage to create HiPS maps of
all four bands of the WISE all-sky survey, down to HiPS level 9 tiles, level 18
pixels. The maps are scheduled for completion and release in late-Summer 2019.

There are two characteristics of Montage that bring value to HiPS maps: it
rectifies backgrounds by modeling differences between images; and includes an
adaptive stretch for creating visualizations. Creating a HiPS map of the WISE
images involves using existing tools to computing HEALPix mosaics of the WISE
images in FITS format, background rectified to create the highest quality
mosaics, and then creating from the mosaics HiPS tiles in PNG format, with
display values created with an adaptive stretch; the process used new tools that
will be released in Summer 2019. Thus far we have begin created HiPS tiles for
18% of the sky, and we have begun processing the rest of the WISE images.

**More information:** <http://montage.ipac.caltech.edu>; code repository is at
<https://github.com/Caltech-IPAC/Montage>. If you would like to evaluate this
functionality, please send an e-mail to: gbb 'at' ipac.caltech.edu.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="exomercat.png" thumbnail="exomercat_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Exo-MerCat, a VO-aware exoplanet catalog

After attending the fourth VO school at the Centre de Données astronomiques de
Strasbourg (CDS) in Strasbourg on 20-22 November 2018, the construction of an
exoplanet catalog was finalized that collects all available data from the
currently available online databases, called Exo-MerCat. Exo-MerCat is a Python
code that collects and selects the most precise measurement for all interesting
planetary and orbital parameters, taking into account the presence of multiple
aliases for the same target. It performs comparisons and checks as well, to find
coordinate errors or alias mismatches. By means of VO TAP and ConeSearch queries
to SIMBAD and VizieR, it retrieves the main identifier for each target, allowing
any user to easily download stellar information at a later stage by querying
their favorite catalog in a standardized VO-aware way. For each interesting
planetary parameter, Exo-MerCat stores the corresponding reference paper link.

A Graphic User Interface is provided, which allows the selection of all sorts of
parameter ranges. It can also generate automatic plots that are commonly used in
the exoplanetary community, and the user can retrieve and manipulate data at
will. Exo-MerCat is ingested into a database with a TAP service and can be
queried by all the VO-aware TAP-enabled applications.

The software was presented at the Paris InterOp Meeting
(<https://wiki.ivoa.net/internal/IVOA/InterOpMay2019SSIG/ExoMerCat.pdf>). All
further information will be published soon in a peer-reviewed paper (Alei et al.
– submitted).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="LAMOST.png" thumbnail="LAMOST.png" caption="The website of LAMOST DR5 (top); footprints of the LAMOST pilot survey and the first five years' regular survey (middle); statistics of LAMOST DR5 (bottom)." position="left" floating="true" >}}

### LAMOST Releases the Fifth Data Release (DR5) Internationally

LAMOST published its fifth Data Release (DR5) to astronomers worldwide on June
26, 2019, according to the international astronomical practice and "the LAMOST
Spectral Survey Data Policy". It includes all spectra obtained during the pilot
survey and the first five years' regular survey. Scientific users can log on to
the website powered by the China-VO at <http://dr5.lamost.org> for data query
and download. The data release complies with multiple IVOA standards and
protocols, including Simple Cone Search, Simple Spectral Access (SSA), Simple
Application Messaging Protocol (SAMP), etc.

Through LAMOST DR5, a total number of 9.02 million spectra were released to the
international community. Additionally, a catalog which provides stellar
parameters of 5.34 million stars was also released internationally in this data
set. The catalog will also be included in CDS VizieR. LAMOST DR5 has thus
resulted in the largest public spectral data set and stellar parameter catalog
in the world at present!

**More information:** <http://dr5.lamost.org>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="pyesasky.png" thumbnail="pyesasky_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### pyESASky: An ESASky widget for Jupyter

[ESASky](https://sky.esa.int/) allows scientists to explore large collections of
astronomical data with the click of a button. At the same time,
[Jupyter Notebook](https://jupyter.org/) and, more recently, JupyterLab provide
the framework for quick and effective manipulation, visualisation and analysis
of datasets. To take advantage of both tools, at the
[ESAC Science Data Centre (ESDC)](https://archives.esac.esa.int/) we have
developed pyESASky, a Jupyter Widget for ESASky. This is a library that allows
scientists to interact with ESASky within Jupyter, and to overlay their own data
on ESASky, from catalogues to footprints and HiPS.

The library, still a beta version, can be obtained from
[GitHub](https://github.com/esdc-esac-esa-int/pyesasky). Installation
instructions and some sample notebooks are also included in this distribution.
Interested users are invited to test the widget and provide us feedback via the
[ESASky UserEcho forum](https://esdc.userecho.com/communities/1-esasky).

**More information:** [pyESASky](https://github.com/esdc-esac-esa-int/pyesasky)

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[The CARMENES search for exoplanets around M dwarfs. Different roads to radii and masses of the target stars](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019A%26A...625A..68S/abstract)  
**Schweitzer, A.; Passegger, V. M.; Cifuentes, C.; Béjar, V. J. S.; Cortés-Contreras, M.; Caballero, J. A.; del Burgo, C.; Czesla, S.; Kürster, M.; Montes, D.; Zapatero Osorio, M. R.; Ribas, I.; Reiners, A.; Quirrenbach, A.; Amado, P. J.; Aceituno, J.; Anglada-Escudé, G.; Bauer, F. F.; Dreizler, S.; Jeffers, S. V. Guenther, E. W.; Henning, T.; Kaminski, A.; Lafarga, M.; Marfil, E.; Morales, J. C.; Schmitt, J. H. M. M.; Seifert, W.; Solano, E.; Tabernero, H. M.; Zechmeister, M.**  
_A&A (2019) Volume 625, 68_

Aims: We determine the radii and masses of 293 nearby, bright M dwarfs of the
CARMENES survey. This is the first time that such a large and homogeneous
high-resolution (R > 80 000) spectroscopic survey has been used to derive these
fundamental stellar parameters.

Methods: We derived the radii using Stefan-Boltzmann's law. We obtained the
required effective temperatures Teff from a spectral analysis and we obtained
the required luminosities L from integrated broadband photometry together with
the Gaia DR2 parallaxes. The mass was then determined using a mass-radius
relation that we derived from eclipsing binaries known in the literature. We
compared this method with three other methods: (1) We calculated the mass from
the radius and the surface gravity log g, which was obtained from the same
spectral analysis as Teff. (2) We used a widely used infrared mass-magnitude
relation. (3) We used a Bayesian approach to infer stellar parameters from the
comparison of the absolute magnitudes and colors of our targets with
evolutionary models.

Results: Between spectral types M0 V and M7 V our radii cover the range 0.1 R ⊙
< R < 0.6 R ⊙ with an error of 2-3% and our masses cover 0.09 ℳ⊙ < ℳ < 0.6 ℳ⊙
with an error of 3-5%. We find good agreement between the masses determined with
these different methods for most of our targets. Only the masses of very young
objects show discrepancies. This can be well explained with the assumptions that
we used for our methods.

**DOI:** [10.1051/0004-6361/201834965](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/link_gateway/2019A&A...625A..68S/doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201834965)

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=02&y_in=2019&m_en=09&y_en=2019&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from February to September 2019 can be
found at the following
[list](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=02&y_in=2019&m_en=09&y_en=2019&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **6-10 October 2019 - [ADASS XXIX](https://www.adass2019.nl/)**
  
  (Groningen, The Netherlands)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXIX program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings.

* **11-13 October 2019 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://www.adass2019.nl/ivoa/ivoa-2/)**
  
  (Groningen, The Netherlands)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2019 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be held in Groningen,
  The Netherlands and will be hosted by ASTRON.

* **22-25 October 2019 - [.Astronomy 11](https://www.dotastronomy.com/)**
  
  (Toronto, Canada)
  
  The .Astronomy conference series aims to build a dynamic and creative
  community of scientists and educators to exploit the potential offered by
  modern computing and the internet in the era of data-driven astronomy. Rather
  than scientific questions, the focus is on innovative use of the web to
  develop new research tools, and to communicate with a broad audience through
  online platforms and innovative engagement resources. .Astronomy provides
  scientists, developers and science communicators an opportunity to showcase
  their ideas and skills outside their institutes or research areas, and help
  them get credit for their work.

* **4-8 January 2020 - [235th AAS Meeting](https://aas.org/meetings/aas235)**
  
  (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA)
  
  The American Astronomical Society (AAS) meetings serve as a venue for the
  general astronomical community to gather and discuss the latest science,
  tools, and technologies in astronomy. At the 235th AAS Meeting, there will be
  a couple of VO-related sessions and exhibits, including presentations from
  international VO partners, open to all astronomers. IVOA affiliated
  institutions will have booths in the exhibition hall throughout the week,
  demonstrating tools and services such as the NASA Astrophysics Data System,
  SciServer, VizieR, and other VO data access interfaces. Attendees may learn
  more about the data and services provided by those institutions, and have
  face-to-face discussions with developers.

* **29 June - 3 July 2020 - [EAS Annual Meeting 2020](https://eas.unige.ch/EAS2020/)**
  
  (Leiden, The Netherlands)
  
  The European Astronomical Society (EAS) Annual Meeting (formerly known as
  EWASS, and earlier JENAM) has more than 25 years of tradition and it has
  imposed itself as the largest conference for European astronomy. In addition
  to plenary sessions and the award of prestigious prizes, the conference hosts
  many symposia held in parallel, as well as special sessions and meetings. IVOA
  affiliated institutions will have booths in the exhibition hall throughout the
  week, demonstrating tools and services such as VizieR, Aladin, ESO tools and
  services, ESA archives, and other VO data access interfaces. Attendees may
  learn more about the data and services provided by those institutions, and
  have face-to-face discussions with scientists and developers.

{{< newsletter-social-links >}}