---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - July 2020"
date: 2019-09-01T02:00:00+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Deborah Baines, Bruce Berriman, Jamie Anne
Budynkiewicz, Theresa Dower, Giulia Iafrate, Shanshan Li, Simon O'Toole, Yihan
Tao.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="interop.png" thumbnail="interop_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### The Northern Spring Interoperability Meeting

Janet Evans and Patrick Dowler

The Northern Spring Interop meeting was held May 4–8 virtually via Zoom. Like
many other conferences caught in the pandemic, the meeting originally scheduled
for Sydney Australia was quickly re-organized. A virtual meeting seemed
appropriate for an organization that has ‘Virtual’ in its name – so we set forth
to meet the challenge! A surprising outcome was that this year’s Northern Spring
Interop meeting had the largest number of attendees, at 207, of any IVOA meeting
previously. Many participants attended sessions of interest with an average of
~50 attendees at each session.

At registration, participants were given the opportunity to ‘vote’ on topics of
interest. The most popular topics made up approximately half of the program. The
other half of the sessions focused on core topics related to status and
discussion on current technical coordination group efforts.

The meeting format included serial sessions during three time slots, arranged so
that two of the sessions could easily be attended for 2/3 of the world-wide
participants in a given day, while the third session would fall somewhere during
the overnight hours. Each session had a presenter, a moderator and a note-taker.
The Zoom ‘chat’ and ‘raised hand’ features were used to take questions. Etherpad
was used for notes and added questions from the audience. Each session was 60
minutes and video recorded for convenient access to meeting content.

Highlights of the meeting included a Radio Astronomy Plenary. The Radio
Astronomy interest group is a new group within the IVOA and presentations
highlighted a number of projects that are making use of the VO in their current
work and identified some areas of further work that are needed going forward.
The FAIR Data Maturity Model presentation and discussion in the IVOA drew
considerable interest and is core to many of our discussion about data handling.
The Working and Interest groups provided status updates in their sessions on
ongoing efforts. Each session fielded questions and engaged in discussions with
the audience. Included was a Data Model status on the Source data model, and the
Measurements, Coordinates, and Transform models. The Data Access Layer (DAL)
group updated the attendees on current efforts including DataLink, ADQL, SIA2
and SODA. The Timing interest group engaged in several joint sessions with other
groups and covered topics including light curves in VOTables, VOevent next
steps, Cone search, and an update on the working standard that identifies
Observatory object visibility and schedule for joint and follow-up observations
at other facilities. The Grid and Web Services group held sessions on
Standardizing Science Platforms and moving toward a new single sign-on standard
able to allow applications and services to easily access private data. Other
interesting sessions focused on Python based tools and applications,
Vocabularies in the VO, and an instructional ‘How To’ session using Git to edit
and build a VO document. Further information on these topics is available from
the [Interop program page](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2020).

The IVOA meeting did miss the hallway chats and working tag-ups that many
members find valuable in moving efforts forward. There were no coffee breaks,
lunches or dinners together where team bonding and coordination also take place.
However, we were encouraged by the number of attendees, and we learned that we
reached people who would otherwise not travel to a meeting. Many familiar faces
and new friends met in this virtual environment for 5 days. Our plan forward is
to work to find the balance between the traditional meeting and virtual
meetings. We thank all who participated in the first Virtual Interop meeting and
encourage you to continue to participate in the efforts of the IVOA through the
[working group and interest group email discussions](http://www.ivoa.net/members/index.html)
and engaging with the IVOA.

**More information:** <https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpMay2020>

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="https://youtu.be/Ajro94X7kUc" thumbnail="youtube.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### SVO schools become even more virtual
In these times of lockdown, SVO schools become even more virtual. The tutorial on how to discover brown dwarfs using Aladin is now available in Youtube:

<https://youtu.be/Ajro94X7kUc>

The tutorial is intentionally in Spanish to cover the needs of the amateur and citizen science communities.

{{</ side-image >}}

**Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](http://www.euro-vo.org/?q=science/scientific-tutorials)**

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="NewInV11.png" thumbnail="aladinv11.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Aladin V11

The CDS is pleased to announce the 11th release of its Aladin Desktop software
on April 2020.

Aladin Desktop is an interactive sky atlas allowing an “all-sky” approach to the
visualisation of astronomical data. Aladin provides access to astronomical image
surveys with capabilities for superimposing entries from astronomical catalogues
or databases, and also providing access to related data and information from the
SIMBAD database, the VizieR service and many other VO services.

The main innovation of Aladin v11 is the support of the temporal dimension of
data collections, whether for filtering catalog sources, or for handling time
coverages. This new version also includes support for the most recent IVOA
standards, including TAP1.1 (s_region definition), MOC1.1 (ASCII serialization)
and VOTable 1.4 (TIMESYS support). The new compression modes described in
version 4.0 of the FITS reference document are also now supported (RICE, GZIP_1,
GZIP_2, HCOMPRESS ...).

**More information:** <https://aladin.u-strasbg.fr/AladinDesktop/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="clusterix.png" thumbnail="clusterix_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Clusterix 2.0: a virtual observatory tool to estimate cluster membership probability

([2020MNRAS.492.5811B](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020MNRAS.492.5811B/abstract))

Clusterix 2.0 is a web-based, Virtual Observatory compliant, interactive tool
for the determination of membership probabilities in stellar clusters based on
proper-motion data using a fully non-parametric method. The system offers the
possibility to query different catalogues, such as Gaia, or upload a user's own
data.

**More information:** <http://clusterix.cab.inta-csic.es/clusterix/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="esasky.png" thumbnail="esasky_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### ESASky in Chinese and new datasets available

The latest release of ESASky is now available in Chinese. The Chinese
translation, aimed at reaching larger segments of the professional and amateur
astronomical community, was made possible thanks to a collaboration with
colleagues from the China-VO and China's Large Sky Area Multi Object
Spectroscopic Telescope (LAMOST), with the ESASky team offering to incorporate
the observatory's data into the platform and their Chinese counterparts offering
to translate the app.

In addition, and thanks to the data protocols set by the IVOA and the
opportunities for collaboration in this context, ESASky also provides access to
data from ground based observatories and major data centres, such as the
European Southern Observatory (ESO), NASA's Mikulski Archive for Space
Telescopes (MAST) and the Canadian Astronomy Data Centre (CADC), all via an
external Table Access Protocol (TAP) functionality. The data include images,
spectra, data cubes, time series data and more. Future plans include adding more
TAPs from large data centres and to include data from any TAP of the user's
choice.

**More information:** [sky.esa.int](https://sky.esa.int/) and [how to use ESASky](https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/esdc/esasky-how-to)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="GTC.png" thumbnail="GTC.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Gran Telescopio Canarias VO Services

The Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC) is the largest telescope in the
optical-infrared regime. Its VO-compliant archive is mantained by the Spanish
Virtual Observatory (SVO).

SVO has built high-level data products (astrometrically and photometrically
corrected images, detection and source catalogues) for one of the most demanded
GTC instruments: OSIRIS. Data Release 1 includes 6788 broad-band images in the
Sloan griz filters obtained between April 2009 and January 2014 and the
associated catalogue with roughly 6.23 million detections of more than 630 000
unique sources.

Data access is available through web forms:
- [Images](http://gtc.sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/gtc/)
- [Catalogues](http://svo2.cab.inta-csic.es/vocats/v2/gtc-osiris/)

**More information:** [2020MNRAS.491..129C](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020MNRAS.491..129C/abstract)

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="fast.png" thumbnail="fast_s.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Information Management System for the Largest Radio Telescope Powered by the VO

China-VO have developed an information management system for the
Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical radio Telescope (FAST), which is the
world’s largest single radio dish telescope located in Guizhou, China. The
system provides a portal for the public, telescope users and telescope managers.
Some of the key functions include: user management; release of news;
announcements and scientific achievements; management of observation projects
and parameter submission; management and search of observation logs; application
of user accounts; and data usage authorisation for the FAST data center, etc.
The system is designed to be in accordance with several IVOA standards, which
lays the foundation for future data releases of FAST using VO standards. The
system is running online at <https://fast.bao.ac.cn/>.

**More information:** <https://fast.bao.ac.cn/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="firefly-m51withFilter.png" thumbnail="firefly-m51withFilter_s.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### IPAC Firefly

We want to bring to your attention to IPAC Firefly and its support for IVOA
standards. Firefly is open source and available at
[GitHub](https://github.com/Caltech-IPAC/firefly/). It is the underlying
software for several of IRSA’s applications, like IRSA Viewer, Finderchart, WISE
archive and ZTF. It has been used in the NED user interface for table data
display, image visualization and plotting. Here are some of its functions:

1. Read in VOTable and display it properly, respecting the data types
2. Make scatter plot and heat map for table data
3. Support for TAP services. It has a simple interactive editor to compile the
   ADQL statement, sends the search request to TAP service, display the results
   nicely
4. Visualize HiPS and MOC images. It can use HiPS as background image for
   objects overlay. User can also pick the image from a list, zoom in/out
5. Support for datalink
6. APIs to use its different displaying and visualization components

**More information:** <https://github.com/Caltech-IPAC/firefly/>

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="nexsciTAP.png" thumbnail="nexsciTAP.png" caption="TOPCAT Access to the Planetary Systems Table at Exoplanet Archive via the Archive TAP service" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### nexsciTAP: a Python-based TAP server

The NASA Exoplanet Science Institute (NExScI) at Caltech/IPAC has developed
nexsciTAP, a Python-based TAP server. It has been deployed to serve the
Planetary Systems table in the
[NASA Exoplanet Archive](https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/cgi-bin/TblView/nph-tblView?app=ExoTbls&config=PS).
Deployment of all the tables in the archive will follow this year. nexsciTAP has
been tested with the PyVO, TAP+ and TOPCAT clients. It is being incorporated
into the archive for the NEID exteme-precision radial velocity engine, and
underpins the Python client to the Keck Observatory Archive (KOA) (release date
July 2020). The code will be made freely available on Git Hub by July 31 2020,
and will have an Open Source BSD-3 clause license. NExScI is now seeking
evaluators for the code and documentation.

Interested persons please contact Bruce Berriman at gbb 'at' ipac.caltech.edu.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[MASCARA-4 b/bRing-1 b: A retrograde hot Jupiter around a bright A-type star](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020A%26A...635A..60D/abstract)  
**Dorval, P.; Talens, G. J. J.; Otten, G. P. P. L.; Brahm, R.; Jordán, A.; Torres, P.; Vanzi, L.; Zapata, A.; Henry, T.; Paredes, L.; Jao, W. C.; James, H.; Hinojosa, R.; Bakos, G. A.; Csubry, Z.; Bhatti, W.; Suc, V.; Osip, D.; Mamajek, E. E.; Mellon, S. N. Wyttenbach, A.; Stuik, R.; Kenworthy, M.; Bailey, J.; Ireland, M.; Crawford, S.; Lomberg, B.; Kuhn, R.; Snellen, I.**  
_A&A (2020) Volume 635, A60_


_Context._ The Multi-site All-Sky CAmeRA (MASCARA) and bRing are both
photometric ground-based instruments with multiple stations that rely on
interline charge-coupled devices with wide-field lenses to monitor bright stars
in the local sky for variability. MASCARA has already discovered several planets
in the northern sky, which are among the brightest known transiting hot Jupiter
systems.

_Aims._ In this paper, we aim to characterize a transiting planetary candidate
in the southern skies found in the combined MASCARA and bRing data sets of HD
85628, an A7V star of V = 8.2 mag at a distance 172 pc, to establish its
planetary nature.

_Methods._ The candidate was originally detected in data obtained jointly with
the MASCARA and bRing instruments using a Box Least-Square search for transit
events. Further photometry was taken by the 0.7 m Chilean-Hungarian Automated
Telescope (CHAT), and radial velocity measurements with the Fiber Dual Echelle
Optical Spectrograph on the European Southern Observatory 1.0 m Telescope.
High-resolution spectra during a transit were taken with the CTIO
high-resolution spectrometer (CHIRON) on the Small and Moderate Aperture
Research Telescope System 1.5 m telescope to target the Doppler shadow of the
candidate.

_Results._ We confirm the existence of a hot Jupiter transiting the bright A7V
star HD 85628, which we co-designate as MASCARA-4b and bRing-1b. It is in an
orbit of 2.824 days, with an estimated planet radius of 1.53−0.04+0.07 RJup and
an estimated planet mass of 3.1 ± 0.9 MJup, putting it well within the planetary
regime. The CHAT observations show a partial transit, reducing the probability
that the transit was around a faint background star. The CHIRON observations
show a clear Doppler shadow, implying that the transiting object is in a
retrograde orbit with |λ| =244.9−3.6+2.7°. The planet orbits at a distance of
0.047 ± 0.004 AU from the star and has a zero-albedo equilibrium temperature of
2100 ± 100 K. In addition, we find that HD 85628 has a previously unreported
stellar companion star in the Gaia DR2 data demonstrating common proper motion
and parallax at 4.3′′ separation (projected separation ~740 AU), and with
absolute magnitude consistent with being a K/M dwarf.

_Conclusions._ MASCARA-4 b/bRing-1 b is the brightest transiting hot Jupiter
known to date in a retrograde orbit. It further confirms that planets in
near-polar and retrograde orbits are more common around early-type stars. Due to
its high apparent brightness and short orbital period, the system is
particularly well suited for further atmospheric characterization.

**DOI:** [10.1051/0004-6361/201935611](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/link_gateway/2020A&A...635A..60D/doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201935611)

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=10&y_in=2019&m_en=06&y_en=2020&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from October 2019 to June 2020 can be
found at the following
[list](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=10&y_in=2019&m_en=06&y_en=2020&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **8-12 November 2020 - [ADASS XXX](https://adass2020.es/)**
  
  (Online)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXX program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings. This year we regret that we will not be able to
  welcome you to Granada, Spain as planned due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
  Instead, ADASS will be a Virtual Conference, hosted by IRAM and IAA-CSIC.

* **November 2020 (dates TBD) - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://ivoa2020.cab.inta-csic.es/main/index.php)**
  
  (Online)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2020 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be a Virtual Conference
  and will be hosted by the Spanish VO.

* **Spring 2021 - [.Astronomy 12](https://www.dotastronomy.com/twelve)**
  
  (ESAC, Madrid, Spain)
  
  The .Astronomy conference series aims to build a dynamic and creative
  community of scientists and educators to exploit the potential offered by
  modern computing and the internet in the era of data-driven astronomy. Rather
  than scientific questions, the focus is on innovative use of the web to
  develop new research tools, and to communicate with a broad audience through
  online platforms and innovative engagement resources. .Astronomy provides
  scientists, developers and science communicators an opportunity to showcase
  their ideas and skills outside their institutes or research areas, and help
  them get credit for their work. This event has been postponed to Spring 2021
  due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The expression of interest form is frozen until
  new dates for the meeting are set.

{{< newsletter-social-links >}}