---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - July 2021"
date: 2021-07-01T02:00:00+02:00
tags:
- news
highlights:
- Northern Fall Interoperability Meeting Overview
- Schools and Workshops
- TAP Service at the NASA Exoplanet Archive
- VO standards-based Metadata Management and Data Submission System of NADC
- Featured Science Publication
- Featured Paper
- Refereed Publications
- VO calendar
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) | [Newsletter archives](http://www.ivoa.net/newsletter/) | [Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)  
**IVOA Newsletter Editors:** Stefania Amodeo, Deborah Baines, Giulia Iafrate.

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at <http://ivoa.net/about/>.**

### What is the VO?

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA news

{{< side-image image="ivoa_logoc2.jpg" thumbnail="ivoa_logoc2.jpg" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### Northern Fall Interoperability Meeting Overview

Janet Evans, Marco Molinaro and Patrick Dowler

The Northern Spring Interop meeting was held May 25-28, 2021 via Zoom with 256
registered participants. New this year was a Newcomers session, and 2
Mini-Workshops. The Newcomers session was sponsored by the Education Interest
Group and held on May 24 – the day before the opening of the Interop. Several
scientific use cases were demoed using VO-standards and protocols. The aim was
to help newcomers understand the structure of the IVOA and how Interop meetings
are organized in order to get the most out of the upcoming meeting.

The first Mini-Workshop was on the use of Science Platforms for the
dissemination of Cosmological Simulations. The workshop brought together
scientists, experts in computational Cosmology, VO experts and SP developers who
presented and discussed current implementations and ideas for their future
development. The sessions were well attended with many contributions.

The second Mini-Workshop was on Data Model Usage in the VO. In January, a
collaborative process was initiated to illustrate how the VO can use models to
facilitate interoperability when accessing and analyzing data. The outcome of
this work served as a basis for presentations and discussions during the Data
Model workshop with a focus on time series and catalog data. Follow-on
discussions have been ongoing since the workshop with efforts toward a final
mapping syntax and development of a roadmap planned for conclusion this summer.

A community session was held on IVOA/Astropy/Astroquery/PyVO Collaborations
where members of the IVOA, Astropy, and User community discussed topics and
priorities for further joined priorities and efforts. Other sessions led by the
IVOA Working and Interest Groups focused on core topics related to current
Technical Coordination Group (TCG) efforts. Community led presentations provided
a balance between contributed and core presentations. All sessions were recorded
and available
[here](https://www.canfar.net/storage/list/pdowler/ivoa/virtual2021a).

The TCG thanks all outgoing members and particularly Pat Dowler who completed
his term as TCG chair. We welcome all new committee members and we thank all who
participated in the May Virtual Interop meeting. We also welcome you to
participate in the efforts of the IVOA through the working group and interest
group email & slack discussions and by engaging with the IVOA.

Here are several links to get involved:

|                   |                                 |                                                   |
|-------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| IVOA Website	    | <https://www.ivoa.net/>	        | Place to start                                    |
| IVOA Wiki pages	  | <https://wiki.ivoa.net/>	      | Collaboration area                                |
| Main Mailing List	| interop 'at' ivoa.net	          | IVOA community list                               |
| All Mailing Lists	| <https://www.ivoa.net/members/>	| Identifies email lists for all WG/IG, CSP & Exec. |
| Slack	            | <https://ivoa.slack.com/>       | Collaboration slack channel                       |
| Github	          | <https://github.com/ivoa>       | Collaboration development/new ideas               |
| Github	          | <https://github.com/ivoa-std>   | Standard document development                     |

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and Workshops

{{< side-image image="python.png" thumbnail="python.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### "Python in Astronomy” training workshop

Boliang He

From 25 to 28 May, 2021, the Chinese Virtual Observatory (China-VO) hosted the
"Python in Astronomy" training workshop for young astronomers. 30 graduate
students from all over the country participated in the event. The training
topics included fundamental of python, astronomical data, Virtual Observatory
and AstroPy. Hands-on tutorials on photometric and spectral data processing were
very welcomed by the participants.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="escape1.png" thumbnail="escape1.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### First "ESCAPE Science with interoperable data" school

Enrique Solano, Miriam Cortés

Following the long tradition of VO schools organised by the Euro-VO initiative
in the framework of different European projects (AIDA, 2008-2010; ICE,
2010-2012; CoSADIE, 2012-2015; and ASTERICS, 2015-2019) the ESCAPE project held
its first VO school on 8-12, 19 February 2021. As in previous schools, the goal
was twofold: to expose participants to the variety of VO tools and services so
that they can use them efficiently for their own research, and to gather
requirements and feedback from them. Participants were also introduced to the
vision of the ESCAPE project, in particular to the new context of data sharing
where the Virtual Observatory framework is being integrated into the European
Open Science Cloud (EOSC).

The school was planned to be held in Madrid in May 2020. However, due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, it was postponed and held on-line on February 2021 using Zoom
and Slack as platforms.

During the school, VO experts gave hands-on sessions on the usage of VO tools
and services using real life examples of scientific applications. These hands-on
tutorials provided the starting point for participants to use the tools and
services for their own science projects with the benefit of the expertise of the
tutors.The hands-on tutorials and the more advanced presentations were aimed at
addressing the needs of the participants based on the information they provided
during the registration. The last day was dedicated to the participants own
science cases, applying what they had learnt earlier in the week.

The school was the first experience for many of the partners to run a
high-level-interactive event in an on-line setting. Nevertheless, this
challenging situation did not prevent the school from running very smoothly and
in a perfect “virtual” atmosphere. The meeting was a success, with a great
atmosphere favouring a lot of exchanges and discussions. 93% of the participants
rated the school as “very good” or “excellent” while 100% of the participants
foresee using VO-tools in their future research.

More information on the school can be found
[here](https://svo.cab.inta-csic.es/svoMeetings/index.php?mid=54&action=page&pagename=Meetings/SVO_thematic_network/First_ESCAPE_School/Presentation).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="navo.png" thumbnail="navo.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### NAVO Workshop "Accessing NASA’s Astrophysics Archives using Python"

Bruce Berriman

During the summer meeting of the American Astronomical Society, held June 7-11
2021, the NASA Astronomical Virtual Observatories (NAVO) hosted a workshop
titled "Accessing NASA’s Astrophysics Archives using Python”. The workshop
described several use cases that involved discovery and access of data across
NASA VO-compliant images.

The Python notebooks developed for the workshop are available
[here](https://github.com/NASA-NAVO/navo-workshop) and a webinar recording of
the session is [here](https://youtu.be/wiCCIyXk6-o).

{{</ side-image >}}

**Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](https://www.euro-vo.org/scientific-tutorials/)**

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="TAPservice.jpg" thumbnail="TAPservice.jpg" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### TAP Service at the NASA Exoplanet Archive

Bruce Berriman

The NASA Exoplanet Archive, operated by the NASA Exoplanet Science Institute at
IPAC, has over the past 18 months redesigned its infrastructure to make the data
more standardized, easier to access, more complete, and better reflect the
scientific progress of the field of exoplanetary astrophysics. As part of this
effort, the Exoplanet Archive released new and more comprehensive tables that
were underpinned by Python-based nexsciTAP server
(<https://github.com/Caltech-IPAC/nexsciTAP>). With the release of the new
tables atop the new TAP services in 2020, the NASA Exoplanet Archive saw a
noticeable increase in access of the tables by the community. The NASA Exoplanet
Archive is now in the process of making all its tables TAP compliant.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="NADC.png" thumbnail="NADC.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### VO standards-based Metadata Management and Data Submission System of NADC

Yihan Tao

The National Astronomical Data Center (NADC) of China has developed a metadata
management and data submission system. Data preservation for research project is
one of the major responsibilities for NADC.The system is aimed at supporting the
data submission process of astronomical projects, including the submission and
review of metadata and data. With the system, data administrators can also
curate a published data catalogue and manage the metadata. The metadata standard
employed in the system is consistent with and extended from the VO
standards-Resource Metadata for the Virtual Observatory Version 1.12 and IVOA
Observation Data Model Core Components and its Implementation in the Table
Access Protocol. In order to describe and filter the dataset by types, a
multifaceted taxonomy of waveband, telescope/project, subject, data product
type, production age, process level, content type and content level is adopted
in the system and displayed as tags.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

[Gaia Early Data Release 3. Summary of the contents and survey properties](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021A%26A...649A...1G/abstract)  
**Gaia Collaboration**  
_A&A (2021) Volume 649, A120_


_Context._ We present the early installment of the third Gaia data release, Gaia
EDR3, consisting of astrometry and photometry for 1.8 billion sources brighter
than magnitude 21, complemented with the list of radial velocities from Gaia
DR2.

_Aims._ A summary of the contents of Gaia EDR3 is presented, accompanied by a
discussion on the differences with respect to Gaia DR2 and an overview of the
main limitations which are present in the survey. Recommendations are made on
the responsible use of Gaia EDR3 results.

_Methods._ The raw data collected with the Gaia instruments during the first 34
months of the mission have been processed by the Gaia Data Processing and
Analysis Consortium and turned into this early third data release, which
represents a major advance with respect to Gaia DR2 in terms of astrometric and
photometric precision, accuracy, and homogeneity.

_Results._ Gaia EDR3 contains celestial positions and the apparent brightness in
G for approximately 1.8 billion sources. For 1.5 billion of those sources,
parallaxes, proper motions, and the (GBP − GRP) colour are also available. The
passbands for G, GBP, and GRP are provided as part of the release. For ease of
use, the 7 million radial velocities from Gaia DR2 are included in this release,
after the removal of a small number of spurious values. New radial velocities
will appear as part of Gaia DR3. Finally, Gaia EDR3 represents an updated
materialisation of the celestial reference frame (CRF) in the optical, the
Gaia-CRF3, which is based solely on extragalactic sources. The creation of the
source list for Gaia EDR3 includes enhancements that make it more robust with
respect to high proper motion stars, and the disturbing effects of spurious and
partially resolved sources. The source list is largely the same as that for Gaia
DR2, but it does feature new sources and there are some notable changes. The
source list will not change for Gaia DR3. Conclusions: Gaia EDR3 represents a
significant advance over Gaia DR2, with parallax precisions increased by 30 per
cent, proper motion precisions increased by a factor of 2, and the systematic
errors in the astrometry suppressed by 30-40% for the parallaxes and by a factor
~2.5 for the proper motions. The photometry also features increased precision,
but above all much better homogeneity across colour, magnitude, and celestial
position. A single passband for G, GBP, and GRP is valid over the entire
magnitude and colour range, with no systematics above the 1% level.

**DOI:**
[10.1051/0004-6361/202039657](https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202039657)

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=07&y_in=2020&m_en=01&y_en=2021&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from March 2021 to July 2021 can be found
at the following
[list](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=cit_desc&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=03&y_in=2021&m_en=12&y_en=2021&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc) mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

# VO calendar

* **24 - 28 October 2021 - [ADASS XXXI](http://adass2021.ac.za/)**
  
  (Hybrid meeting)
  
  The XXXI ADASS conference will be held in Cape Town (South Africa). This
  annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) conference,
  held in a different location each year, is a forum for astronomers, computer
  scientists, software engineers, faculty members and students working in areas
  related to algorithms, software and systems for the acquisition, reduction,
  analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The ADASS XXXI program will
  include invited talks, contributed papers, display sessions, tutorials,
  computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of a Feather” or BoF)
  meetings.

* **2 - 4 November 2021 - [IVOA Interoperability Meeting](https://wiki.ivoa.net/twiki/bin/view/IVOA/InterOpNov2021)**
  
  (Online)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2021 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be a Virtual Conference.

{{< newsletter-social-links >}}