---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - March 2022"
date: 2022-03-01T10:58:36+02:00
tags:
- news
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) |
[Newsletter archives](/newsletter/) |
[Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at
[http://ivoa.net/about/](/about/).**

**What is the VO?**

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA NEWS


{{< side-image image="ivoa_logoc2.jpg" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### 2021 Northern Fall Interoperability Meeting Overview

Janet Evans, Marco Molinaro and Patrick Dowler

The Northern Fall Interop meeting was held Nov 02-04, 2021 via Zoom with 182
registered participants from all around the globe. Interop meetings are held
every ∼6 months and this was our fourth virtual meeting since the start of the
global pandemic. Sessions were recorded and posted so that if you missed a
session you can go back and view it. Here is the
[link](https://www.canfar.net/storage/list/pdowler/ivoa/virtual2021b) if you are
interested in session videos.

The sessions were led by the IVOA Working Groups (WG) and Interest Groups (IG)
and focused on core topics related to status and discussion of current group
efforts. Community presentations were solicited and folded into sessions to
provide a balance between contributed and core topics. In addition a Newcomers
session and a session sponsored by the Committee for Science Priorities (CSP)
rounded out the meeting. The Newcomers session was sponsored by the Education
Interest Group and held the day before the opening of the Interop. Several
scientific use cases were demoed using VO-standards and protocols. The aim was
to help newcomers understand the structure of the IVOA and how Interop meetings
are organized in order to get the most out of the upcoming meeting. We plan on
regular Newcomers sessions at Interop meetings going forward. The CSP session
titled “Bringing services and tools to the research community” welcomed
presentations by projects on their IVOA support status and community
involvement. Panelists from NASA Astronomical VO (NAVO), IPAC, Spanish VO,
Chandra, ASVO, and ESA presented overviews of their project efforts. A
discussion led by the CSP chair followed and focused on topics of interest and a
vision toward the future.

A new and important IVOA Architecture document (lead author Pat Dowler) was
released just before the meeting. The document represents the current status of
the IVOA Architecture. You can find descriptions of the IVOA Level 0, 1, and 2
architecture, a dependency diagram showing the relationships between IVOA
standards, a summary description of each standard, and links to each of the full
standard documents. Here is a link if you are interested in reviewing the
document

The Closing Plenary and presentation by the TCG, emphasized progress of
standards over the last 6 months, and reminded the audience of the Technical
Coordination Group (TCG) and their role in the IVOA. The TCG is made up of
Chairs and Vice-Chairs of working groups, interest groups, and committees. They
are tasked with building consensus in the WG and community, assure coordination
between WG/IG & the Committee for Science Priorities (CSP), liaison with the
Executive committee, and support committee roles in the IVOA documents and
standards process. TCG membership has a 3 year term with a possible 1 year
extension. Members of the astronomical community are welcome to get involved in
the IVOA and to consider a role in the TCG.

Here are several links to get involved:

| Name              | URL                               | Description                                       |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| IVOA Website      | https://www.ivoa.net/             | Place to start                                    |
| IVOA Wiki pages   | https://wiki.ivoa.net/            | Collaboration area                                |
| Main Mailing List | interop 'at' ivoa.net             | IVOA community list                               |
| All Mailing Lists | https://www.ivoa.net/members/     | Identifies email lists for all WG/IG, CSP & Exec. |
| Slack             | https://ivoa.slack.com/           | Collaboration slack channel                       |
| Github            | https://github.com/ivoa           | Collaboration development/new ideas               |
| Github            | https://github.com/ivoa-std       | Standard document development                     |

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="jvo_fitswebql.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### JVO Breaking Through the 1TB Barrier

Christopher Zapart, Yuji Shirasaki, Masatoshi Ohishi, Yoshihiko Mizumoto

Recently the Japanese Virtual Observatory (JVO) - part of the National
Astronomical Observatory of Japan - has gained an important new capability.
Using a 28 CPU-core Mac Pro workstation equipped with 1.5TB of RAM and running a
normal production version of Rust FITSWebQL v4, they have demonstrated a smooth
real-time preview of a 1.3TiB-large FITS file. FITSWebQL calculates in real-time
the "-1" and "0" moments for FITS data cubes, which places extra stress on the
server memory and CPU. In addition to the stable FITSWebQL v4, work is
progressing on the distributed-computing FITSWEBQL v5 Supercomputer Edition,
with the aim to offer in real-time selected higher moments too. In a quest to
deliver the most performant system, during the development process FITSWEBQLSE
has undergone many drastic language changes, going from Rust to C/C++, followed
by CoArray Fortran & C, then switching over to Julia, and finally turning to
"plain" C / FORTRAN coupled with custom distributed computing. For more details
please visit <https://github.com/jvo203/FITSWEBQLSE> and
<http://jvo.nao.ac.jp/portal/alma/archive.do>.

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="dark_and_quiet_sky.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### VO supports the IAU protection efforts of the Dark and Quiet Sky

Chenzhou Cui

At a press conference on 3 February 2022, the International Astronomical Union
announced the [selection](https://www.iau.org/news/pressreleases/detail/iau2201)
of the SKA Observatory (SKAO) and NSF’s NOIRLab as co-hosts of the new IAU
Centre for the Protection of the Dark and Quiet Sky from Satellite Constellation
Interference. The Centre coordinates collaborative multidisciplinary
international efforts with institutions and individuals and works across
multiple geographic areas to help mitigate the negative impact of satellite
constellations on ground-based optical and radio astronomy observations as well
as humanity’s enjoyment of the night sky. China-VO (National Astronomical Data
Centre of China) and several other VO colleagues have gotten involved into the
new center as Institutional Contributors and Individual Contributors.

On 12 January 2022, Dark and Quiet Skies II for Science and Society Working
Group [report](https://www.iau.org/news/announcements/detail/ann22002) was
published online. The report discuss the feasibility of implementing adequate
measures to mitigate the impact of artificial interferences. In October 2021
more than 700 people from 76 countries took part in the United
Nations/Spain/International Astronomical Union Conference on Dark and Quiet
Skies for Science and Society online. The results of this meeting are contained
in the report.

Section 6.1 "Standards from the Virtual Observatory for SatHub" was contributed
by China-VO. In the Section, VO and IVOA backgrounds are introduced briefly. VO
standards and tools, like HiPS and WWT, and their potential contributions to
SatHub are discussed. SatHub will act as a central virtual clearinghouse and
repository for the coordination of effort and dissemination of data and
information.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Schools and workshops

{{< side-image image="schools_and_workshop.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Second ESCAPE Virtual Observatory School

Stefania Amodeo

The [ESCAPE](https://projectescape.eu/) project held its second international
Virtual Observatory (VO) school on February 22-24 and on March 4th 2022. As in
the previous schools organised by the Euro-VO initiative, the goal was to
promote and enhance the VO as framework to exploit the huge amount of data
provided by the ever-growing number of ground-based and space facilities, as
well as to gather requirements and feedback from the participants. VO experts
gave hands-on tutorials on the usage of VO tools and services in “real life”
examples of scientific applications, including the exploration of large
catalogues like Gaia, cross-matching of big survey data, exploration of
transient events and electromagnetic follow-up of gravitational-wave events. The
last day was dedicated to the participants science cases and their own use of
the VO-skills learned during the school. Planned initially as a hybrid meeting
at the Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg and online, the school took place
online exclusively due to the persistence of the pandemic situation. More
information on the school, including the tutorial material can be found
[here](https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/25225/).

Access more scientific usage tutorials
[here](https://www.euro-vo.org/scientific-tutorials/).

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="mocs_in_action.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### MOCs in action for multi-messenger astronomy

Mark Allen, Giuseppe Greco

The IVOA standardised Multi Order Coverage
([MOC](https://ivoa.net/documents/MOC/20220125/index.html)) maps offer practical
ways to manage complex regions of the sky. In a new Astronomy and Computing
paper, "Multi Order Coverage data structure to plan multi-messenger
observations” [Greco et al. 2022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ascom.2022.100547)
presents an application of MOC, in combination with the astroplan observation
planning package to enable the efficient computation of sky regions and the
visibility of these regions from a specific location on the Earth at a
particular time. The published article includes an associated Jupyter notebook
and a video demonstration of the workflow which provides the basis of a new
tutorial in the [Second ESCAPE Virtual Observatory
School](https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/25225/).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="multi_messenger_in_esasky.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### Multi-messenger astronomy with ESASky

Deborah Baines

ESASky is a science-driven discovery portal developed at the European Space
Agency’s ESAC Science Data Centre that allows the interactive exploration of a
large collection of astronomical data, providing a very useful tool for
exploring the multi-wavelength sky with the click of a button. The latest
release of ESASky is branching into multi-messenger astronomy and shows
gravitational wave (GW) event probability maps on the sky, allowing users to
look for electromagnetic counterparts for the GW events and using ESASky to
quickly access all available archival electromagnetic data. Near future releases
intend on expanding the multi-messenger feature and include, for example, the
IceCube neutrino footprint.

Additionally, the latest releases of ESASky have increased the amount of science
ready data accessible through the tool. These include: all public CHEOPS
observational metadata and light curves; new and updated catalogues in the high
energy domain (such as Data Release 11 of the Fourth XMM-Newton Serendipitous
Source catalog and the Fermi-LAT 10-year source catalog); HiPS from PanSTARRS
and ASTRON (the TGSS ADR progressive survey and Apertif Data release 1 survey);
the ability to include any HiPS from a URL, local computer or by browsing the
CDS HiPS list for globally available HiPS; and the external Table Access
Protocol (TAP) service has been expanded too, complementing the access to MAST,
ESO and CADC data with the access to ASTRON and the HEASARC master catalogs.

Finally, in collaboration with the ESA/Hubble team, ESASky now provides access
to the Hubble outreach images on the ESA/Hubble website. Users can tour the
Hubble outreach images overlaid on the sky, read the explanation about each
image and link to the appropriate ESA/Hubble outreach image page.

**More information:** <https://sky.esa.int> and
[how to use ESASky](https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/esdc/esasky-how-to).

{{</ side-image >}}

{{< side-image image="cefca_catalogues.png" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### The CEFCA Catalogues Portal VO Services

Tamara Civera

The Centro de Estudios de Física del Cosmos de Aragón
([CEFCA](https://www.cefca.es/)) is carrying out from the Observatorio
Astrofísico de Javalambre ([OAJ](https://oajweb.cefca.es/), Teruel, Spain) two
large area multiband photometric sky surveys, [J-PLUS](https://www.j-plus.es/),
and [J-PAS](https://www.j-pas.org/), covering the entire optical spectrum using
narrow and broad band filters. J-PAS and J-PLUS include coadded and individual
frame images, dual and single catalogue data generated from coadded images, and
photo-redshift computations.

All this survey data (at the present moment, J-PLUS DR1 and DR2 and MiniJ-PAS
PDR201912) is offered through the CEFCA Catalogues portal which provides
advanced tools for data search, visualization and download. This powerful portal
includes web user interface services such as sky navigator, object
visualization, object list search, ADQL asynchronous queries interface, cone
search and image search and download. All these services support SAMP protocol
to interoperate and communicate with VO-compatible applications. The CEFCA
catalogues portal also offers all this data through Virtual Observatory (VO)
services like SIAP, SCS, TAP and catalogue and images HIPS.

**More information:** <http://archive.cefca.es>.

{{</ side-image >}}

---

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

_The GALAH+ survey: Third data release_

**Buder, Sven et al.**

_Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 506, Issue 1, pp.150-201_

_Abstract._ The ensemble of chemical element abundance measurements for stars,
along with precision distances and orbit properties, provides high-dimensional
data to study the evolution of the Milky Way. With this third data release of
the Galactic Archaeology with HERMES (GALAH) survey, we publish 678 423 spectra
for 588 571 mostly nearby stars (81.2 per cent of stars are within <2 kpc),
observed with the HERMES spectrograph at the Anglo-Australian Telescope. This
release (hereafter GALAH+ DR3) includes all observations from GALAH Phase 1
(bright, main, and faint survey, 70 per cent), K2-HERMES (17 per cent),
TESS-HERMES (5 per cent), and a subset of ancillary observations (8 per cent)
including the bulge and >75 stellar clusters. We derive stellar parameters Teff,
log g, [Fe/H], vmic, vbroad, and vrad using our modified version of the spectrum
synthesis code Spectroscopy Made Easy (SME) and 1D MARCS model atmospheres. We
break spectroscopic degeneracies in our spectrum analysis with astrometry from
Gaia DR2 and photometry from 2MASS. We report abundance ratios [X/Fe] for 30
different elements (11 of which are based on non-LTE computations) covering five
nucleosynthetic pathways. We describe validations for accuracy and precision,
flagging of peculiar stars/measurements and recommendations for using our
results. Our catalogue comprises 65 per cent dwarfs, 34 per cent giants, and 1
per cent other/unclassified stars. Based on unflagged chemical composition and
age, we find 62 per cent young low-α, 9 per cent young high-α, 27 per cent old
high-α, and 2 per cent stars with [Fe/H] ≤ -1. Based on kinematics, 4 per cent
are halo stars. Several Value-Added-Catalogues, including stellar ages and
dynamics, updated after Gaia eDR3, accompany this release and allow
chrono-chemodynamic analyses, as we showcase.

DOI: [10.1093/mnras/stab1242](https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab1242)

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=07&y_in=2020&m_en=01&y_en=2021&submit=Submit)

The full list of refereed publications from September 2021 to March 2022 can be
found at the following
[list](https://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=cit_desc&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=09&y_in=2021&m_en=03&y_en=2022&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc)
mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc)
mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

## VO calendar

* **24 - 29 April 2022 - IVOA Interoperability Meeting**
  
  (Online)

  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Spring 2022 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be a virtual
  conference.

* **12 - 16 June 2022 - 240th AAS Meeting**
  
  (Pasadena, California, USA)
  
  The American Astronomical Society (AAS) meetings serve as a venue for the
  general astronomical community to gather and discuss the latest science,
  tools, and technologies in astronomy. VO-related sessions and exhibits will be
  held during the meeting, including presentations from international VO
  partners, open to all astronomers. IVOA affiliated institutions will have
  booths in the exhibition hall throughout the week, demonstrating tools and
  services such as the NASA Astrophysics Data System, SciServer, VizieR, and
  other VO data access interfaces. Attendees may learn more about the data and
  services provided by those institutions, and have face-to-face discussions
  with developers.

* **27 June - 1 July 2022 - EAS Annual Meeting 2022**
  
  (Valencia, Spain)
  
  The European Astronomical Society (EAS) Annual Meeting (formerly known as
  EWASS, and earlier JENAM) has more than 25 years of tradition and it has
  imposed itself as the largest conference for European astronomy. In addition
  to plenary sessions and the award of prestigious prizes, the conference hosts
  many symposia held in parallel, as well as special sessions and meetings. IVOA
  affiliated institutions will have booths in the exhibition hall throughout the
  week, demonstrating tools and services such as CDS's VizieR and Aladin, ESO
  tools and services, ESA archives, and other VO data access interfaces.
  Attendees may learn more about the data and services provided by these
  institutions and have face-to-face discussions with scientists and developers.

* **17 - 21 October 2022 - IVOA Interoperability Meeting**
  
  (Online)
  
  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The
  Northern Fall 2022 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be a virtual conference.

* **31 October - 4 November 2022 - ADASS XXXII**
  
  (Online)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXXII program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest (“Birds of
  a Feather” or BoF) meetings.


{{< newsletter-social-links >}}