---
title: "IVOA Newsletter - May 2025"
date: '2025-03-30T19:03:57-05:00'
tags:
- news
highlights:
- 2024 Northern Fall Interoperability Meeting Overview
---

[Subscribe](http://www.ivoa.net/mailman/listinfo/ivoa-news) |
[Newsletter archives](/newsletter/) |
[Write to the editors](mailto:ivoa-news-editors@ivoa.net)

**The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) was formed in June 2002
with a mission to facilitate the international coordination and collaboration
necessary for the development and deployment of the tools, systems and
organizational structures necessary to enable the international utilization of
astronomical archives as an integrated and interoperating virtual observatory.
The IVOA now comprises 20 VO programs from Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Europe, France, Germany, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United
States and an inter-governmental organization (ESA). Membership is open to other
national and international programs according to the
[IVOA Guidelines for Participation](http://ivoa.net/Documents/latest/IVOAParticipation.html).
You can read more about the IVOA and what we do at
[http://ivoa.net/about/](/about/).**

**What is the VO?**

The Virtual Observatory (VO) aims to provide a research environment that will
open up new possibilities for scientific research based on data discovery,
efficient data access, and interoperability. The vision is of global astronomy
archives connected via the VO to form a multiwavelength digital sky that can be
searched, visualized, and analyzed in new and innovative ways. VO projects
worldwide working toward this vision are already providing science capabilities
with new tools and services. This newsletter, aimed at astronomers, highlights
VO tools and technologies for doing astronomy research, recent papers, and
upcoming events.

---

# IVOA NEWS

{{< side-image image="ivoa_logoc2.jpg" position="right" floating="true" alt="IVOA Logo" >}}


### 2024 Northern Fall Interoperability Meeting Overview

{ TBD - Comma-separated list of authors }

The 2024 Northern Fall Interop meeting was held 15 - 17 November 2024 at the University of Malta, Valletta. With ##?
registered participants in person and online from all around the globe. Interop meetings are held
every ∼6 months. Sessions were recorded and posted so that if you missed a
session you can go back and view it. Here is the
[link](https://www.canfar.net/storage/vault/list/IVOA/malta2024b) if you are
interested in session videos.
{{</ side-image >}}
The sessions were led by the IVOA Working Groups (WG) and Interest Groups (IG)
and focused on core topics related to .

Here are several links to get involved:
{{<my-table>}}
| Name              | URL                               | Description                                       |
| ----------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| IVOA Website      | https://www.ivoa.net/             | Place to start                                    |
| IVOA Wiki pages   | https://wiki.ivoa.net/            | Collaboration area                                |
| Main Mailing List | interop 'at' ivoa.net             | IVOA community list                               |
| All Mailing Lists | https://www.ivoa.net/members/     | Identifies email lists for all WG/IG, CSP & Exec. |
| Slack             | https://ivoa.slack.com/           | Collaboration slack channel                       |
| Github            | https://github.com/ivoa           | Collaboration development/new ideas               |
| Github            | https://github.com/ivoa-std       | Standard document development                     |


{{</my-table>}}
{{< side-image image="jvo_fitswebql.png" position="left" floating="true" >}}


---

<!--Not for this short newsletter - REMOVE THIS SECTION
# Schools and workshops

{{< side-image image="" thumbnail="" position="right" floating="true" >}}

### { TBD - TITLE }

{ TBD - Comma-separated list of "authors" }

{ TBD - Content }

{{</ side-image >}}


---   
-->

<!--Not for this short newsletter - REMOVE THIS SECTION
# VO applications and implementation highlights

{{< side-image image="" thumbnail="" position="left" floating="true" >}}

### { TBD - TITLE }

{ TBD - Comma-separated list of "authors" }

{ TBD - Content }

**More information:** { TBD - Links toward the application or related news }

{{</ side-image >}}

---
-->

# Some recent papers about VO-enabled science

### Featured Science Publication

_The Initial Mass Function Based on the Full-sky 20 pc Census of ∼3600 Stars and Brown Dwarfs_

**Kirkpatrick, J. Davy et al.**

_The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, Volume 271, 55_

A complete accounting of nearby objects—from the highest-mass white dwarf progenitors down to low-mass brown dwarfs—is now possible, thanks to an almost complete set of trigonometric parallax determinations from Gaia, ground-based surveys, and Spitzer follow-up. We create a census of objects within a Sun-centered sphere of 20 pc radius and check published literature to decompose each binary or higher-order system into its separate components. The result is a volume-limited census of ∼3600 individual star formation products useful in measuring the initial mass function across the stellar (<8M ⊙) and substellar (≳5M Jup) regimes. Comparing our resulting initial mass function to previous measurements shows good agreement above 0.8M ⊙ and a divergence at lower masses. Our 20 pc space densities are best fit with a quadripartite power law,  ξ(M)=dN/dM∝M−α , with long-established values of α = 2.3 at high masses (0.55 < M < 8.00M ⊙), and α = 1.3 at intermediate masses (0.22 < M < 0.55M ⊙), but at lower masses, we find α = 0.25 for 0.05 < M < 0.22M ⊙, and α = 0.6 for 0.01 < M < 0.05M ⊙. This implies that the rate of production as a function of decreasing mass diminishes in the low-mass star/high-mass brown dwarf regime before increasing again in the low-mass brown dwarf regime. Correcting for completeness, we find a star to brown dwarf number ratio of, currently, 4:1, and an average mass per object of 0.41 M ⊙.

DOI: [10.3847/1538-4365/ad24e2](https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4365/ad24e2) 

### [Refereed Publications](http://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=pub_id&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=04&y_in=2022&m_en=05&y_en=2025&submit=Submit) 

The full list of refereed publications from April 2022 to May 2025 can be found at the following
[list](https://sdc.cab.inta-csic.es/vopubs/jsp/result.jsp?order=cit_desc&bib=&com_id=-&com=&m_in=04&y_in=2022&m_en=05&y_en=2025&submit=Submit),
curated by the Spanish Virtual Observatory.

### More Ways to Find VO-related Publications

All [ADS links](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc)
mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

All [refereed publications](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/#search/fq=%7B!type%3Daqp%20v%3D%24fq_property%7D&fq_property=(property%3A%22refereed%22)&q=abstract%3A%22Virtual%20Observatory%22&sort=date%20desc%2C%20bibcode%20desc)
mentioning the "virtual observatory" in the abstract.

---

## VO calendar

* **1 - 6 June 2025 - IVOA Interoperability Meeting**
  
  (College Park, Maryland, USA)

  The International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) semi-annual
  Interoperability meetings provide an opportunity for discussion and
  development of virtual observatory standards and VO-based applications, and
  are open to those with an interest in utilizing the VO infrastructure and
  tools in support of observatory operations and/or astronomical research. The 
  Northern Spring 2025 IVOA Interoperability meeting will be hosted at the Edward 
  St. John Learning & Teaching Center at the University of Maryland from Monday 
  June 2 to Friday June 6, 2025. The meeting is financially supported by NAVO, 
  the NASA Astronomical Virtual Observatories, and University of Maryland. 
  We also acknowledge support from the Space Telescope Science Institute, 
  NASA ACROSS and the Joint Space-Science Institute. The meeting will be organised 
  in person and with the possibility to follow the main sessions remotely.

* **8 - 12 June 2025 - 246th AAS Meeting**
  
  (Anchorage, Alaska, USA)
  
  The American Astronomical Society (AAS) meetings serve as a venue for the
  general astronomical community to gather and discuss the latest science,
  tools, and technologies in astronomy. VO-related sessions and exhibits will be
  held during the meeting, including presentations from international VO
  partners, open to all astronomers. IVOA affiliated institutions will have
  booths in the exhibition hall throughout the week, demonstrating tools and
  services such as the NASA Astrophysics Data System, SciServer, VizieR, and
  other VO data access interfaces. Attendees may learn more about the data and
  services provided by those institutions, and have face-to-face discussions
  with developers.

* **23 - 27 June 2025 - EAS Annual Meeting 2025**
  
  (University College Cork, Ireland)
  
  The European Astronomical Society (EAS) Annual Meeting (formerly known as
  EWASS, and earlier JENAM) has more than 30 years of tradition and it has
  imposed itself as the largest conference for European astronomy. In addition
  to plenary sessions and the award of prestigious prizes, the conference hosts
  many symposia held in parallel, as well as special sessions and meetings. IVOA
  affiliated institutions will have booths in the exhibition hall throughout the
  week, demonstrating tools and services such as CDS's VizieR and Aladin, ESO
  tools and services, ESA archives, and other VO data access interfaces.
  Attendees may learn more about the data and services provided by these
  institutions and have face-to-face discussions with scientists and developers.

* **9 - 13 November 2025 - ADASS XXXV**
  
  (Goerlitz, Germany)
  
  This annual Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS)
  conference, held in a different location each year, is a forum for
  astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, faculty members and
  students working in areas related to algorithms, software and systems for the
  acquisition, reduction, analysis, and dissemination of astronomical data. The
  ADASS XXXV program will include invited talks, contributed papers, display
  sessions, tutorials, computer demonstrations, and special interest ("Birds of
  a Feather" or BoF) meetings.

{{< newsletter-social-links >}}